seal of mannum-balum-aššur son of ṣilli-adad, seal of šu-illil son of mannum-kī-aššur, seal of puzur-aššur son of ataya. puzur-aššur son of ataya owes 22 shekels of good silver to ali-ahum. reckoned from the week of ilī-dan, month of ša-kēnātim, in the eponymy of enna-suen, he will pay in 14 weeks. if he has not paid in time, he will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per mina per month.
itūr-ilī has received one textile of ordinary quality.
... he did not give you a textile. he returned and 9 shekels of silver ...
seal of šu-illil son of šu-kūbum, seal of ṣilūlu son of uku. when iddin-abum spoke his will, he gave 10 minas ofדsilver to šalim-aššur. he said: he may take it from the interest on my silver.""
from šukkutum to ištar-lamassī and nitahšušar: why is that you (fem. plur.) have written me, saying: the house is no longer a house." urgent, to ennam-aššur ... do not fear!. to ištar-lamassī: if you are truly my sister, then encourage her. do not fear. to nitahšušar: air the -textiles that i left. also, the tablets should be guarded. the which mati? and tibula ... have bought do not release (them) to anyone before ennam-aššur arrives. šamaš-tappā'ī brought you x shekels of silver. ikūn-pīya brought you 1 shekel of gold and x shekels of silver. "
from šu-tammuzī, elaya, ennam-aššur and lamassī to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: in accordance with your missive we have hired a attorney for you; abiya son of bebe is our attorney. take care to stand by the very day the attorney arrives, and have the attorney assist you both with regard to the customers of your father and those with whom you have an argument, and of the first silver, wherever you receive it, collect the silver of the city hall, as much as your father owes, seal the silver and send it; the attorney should seal it together with you, and then send the silver so we can satisfy the eponym. the compound interest should not grow too big for you and make you unhappy. act so as to save your father's house. if you observe that there are certified deeds and credits outstanding on long terms, then seal the tablets, entrust them to a trustworthy affiliated trader, like yourselves, and do not extend your terms without special reasons, do not delay but set out and come together with the attorney. here we seized (witnesses) against šu-kūbum and said: did šalim-aššur give you 5 minas of silver out of those in your tablet?" he refused to confirm to us the silver, what you will declare there. 0.6666 mina of silver: hire for the attorney; he received 0.3333 mina of silver here and will receive 0.3333 mina there. we gave 16.3333 shekels of silver for their disposal; 36.6666 shekels of silver, their expenses, we borrowed in a merchant-house against interest. seal silver there and send it with the first transport so we can pay back the merchant. also, send at least 1 or 2 minas of silver; send it so we can store 40 litres of grain before you come. elaya says: if you are truly my brothers, you must seal the proceeds from the textile in silver and do me a favour. "
seal of ali-ahum, seal of ali-ilī, seal of abila, seal of lā-qēp, that what hinnāya had seized as part of an outstanding claim of aššur-bēl-malkim from atūriya's son andfrom amur-aššur and had entrusted to elamma - an amount of 2 minas 13.5 shekels of refined silver, which elamma in turn had entrusted to ali-ahum and ali-ilī - that this silver will become the joint property / responsibility of ali-ahum, ali-ilī and hinnāya.
we entered šalim-aššur's house to settle the case, and šalim-aššur said: while they are going to lead me personally to burušhaddum in fetters to pay the debt of the slave abu-šalim, will you on the other hand take 30 -textiles and a black donkey from the slave?"šu-bēlum answered: "yes, i have taken what belongs to my slave abu-šalim." šalim-aššur impressed on us what had been sworn by the city, and šalim-aššur said: "in case the slave does not raise claim against your slave, then, will he raise claims against my slave?" šu-bēlum answered: "if he raises claim against yours, then i guarantee for the textiles and the donkey for you." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by uraya, by ilī-dan, by mannum-balum-aššur."
a tablet about 10 minas of silver of puzur-assur and puzur-adad; a tablet about 4 minas of silver of puzur-assur; a tablet about 10 minas of silver of asanum; a tablet about 10 minas of silver of alpili; a tablet about 10 minas of silver of asanum and puzur-istar; a tablet about 5 minas of silver of assur-sululi; a tablet about 17 minas and 15 shekels of silver of ennanatum; a tablet about a debt of our father, i obtained it in kuburnat.
17 shekels of silver, the price of a donkey, 30 minas of copper of istar-pilah, 4 sets of thick saddlecloths, 9 minas of refined copper from the price of a slave, 1 mina of sikku-copper with the son of istar-bani, 2 jars of cumin — all this is available in durhumit. 10 pirikannu-textiles, 1 talent of wool, 2 saddle-rugs, 80 pomegranates, 10 minas of olive oil, a saptinnu- and a nibraru-textile, 2 scarfs from zalpa, 2 donkeys with their harness — all this i gave to assur-imitti.
2 pirikannus: šukkutum; 2 pirikannus: enna-suen; 2 pirikannus and an akkadian undergarment, (and) 0.5 shekel silver owed by hanu; 1 pirikannu, 1 from zalpe, a nibrāru, azu and ilī-ašrannī brought to amur-ištar. all these pirikannus ištar-lamassī has given as free loans.
ikūn-pīya and ennam-aššur seized us, and ikūn-pīya said to ennam-aššur: lend me 5 talents of washed, broken copper, and have puzur-šamaš reimburse you." ennam-aššur lent 5 talents of washed, broken copper to ikūn-pīya and puzur-šamaš should reimburse ennam-aššur. puzur-šamaš said: "within 15 days i shall personally pay you your 5 talents of copper." ennam-aššur answered: "what then if indeed on the 15th day your terms become exceeded at all?" ikūn-pīya answered: "let puzur-šamaš pay you your 5 talents of washed, broken copper. as for the interest, as much as the term is exceeded this copper is my obligation." in 4 days the god will rise and it is the week of adad-ṣulūlī ... month kuzallu, eponymy ṣilūlu. ikūn-pīya continued saying to ennam-aššur: "when you arrive at purušhaddum, then you will personally receive your earnings from 1 or 2 minas of silver, and thus i shall do you a favour myself." the wahšušana colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by aššur-idī, by elāli; puzur-ilī son of balzuenum was our (absent) partner. "
from itūr-ilī to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: urgent, urgent, clear yourselves and do not send any copper to burušhaddum! sell even the slave-girls for any price, take the silver and set out and come! as i previously pleaded with the financiers and they did not agree - today they have agreed!
to šalim-aššur from iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, inah-ilī, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: you have written us, saying: x, further, 92 abarnian textiles, ..." ... -aššur ... of credit ... x ... -textiles that you wrote ... you must ... there; ... total of your textiles: x hundred textiles; thereof 4 robes, 2 -textiles you will receive for 27.83333 minas 2 shekels of tin ... 100 ... textiles ... either ... 7 abarnian textiles ... fine -textiles ... 1 ... 30 fine -textiles ... apart from 4 textiles ...50 textiles for ... 7 textiles, the import duty, ... x textiles for the wrapping ... your -textiles ... kurub-ištar ... sealed ... in the house ... are available ... that you [gave] to ali-ahum, x donkeys died during the journey, their ... he bought for 32 shekels of silver; 23 donkeys has ...-aššur ... to burušhaddum; ... 10 donkeys ali-ahum left in support of your goods. 1 donkey ... bought. of the 2 minas of silver that you gave for his disposal 32 shekels of silver he paid as the price of ... for the rest of your silver, ... x minas 2 shekels of his tin 600 nails ... i returned to you. 86 green ones ... of the wool ... 5 minas 8 shekels of tin ... 24 minas each. 1 talent of copper that your eye ... and 4 ... 20+x minas 5 shekels of tin under your seal ... that when they ... released, now, 4 talents 12 minas of theirs; 27! 0.83333 minas 2 shekels of tin he received for 4 robes and 2 -textiles, and your tin, 5 talents 57 minas 7 shekels - 4 talents ... dadaya ... qaqqadānum ... and 0.5 mina aššur-... of 48 ... uzuwa to kanesh ... tin and textiles 10 ... 10.5 minas of tin ... to the son of ikra... the rest of your tin: 30 ... in ..."
to ali-ahum and aššur-malik from iddin-abum: i wrote to you with bēlum-bāni, saying: aššur-bēl-šadu'e son of ali-ahum gave me silver for purchases in the city." settle the affair as well as you can and then send me word so i can send you silver and you can pay him. my dear brothers, send me word and inform me one way or the other whether the affair has been settled. my dear brothers, take care. "
... x akkadian textiles under my seal, 1 black donkey, this šalim-bēlī and aššur-pilah bring to you (plural). i gave them 15 shekels of silver, the price of a donkey; further, 6 shekels of silver (and) a . they have been paid in silver 0.3333 mina 1 shekel for their smuggling. let them count the textiles under my seal for you, and then entrust the textiles that i left in ali-ahum's house to uku and have him bring them to me in durhumit. uku brings you 4 minas of tin under my seal. if he wants a donkey there, buy him a donkey. also, buy him small goods. give uku a black donkey plus the donkey's harness ... plus 2 that šalim-bēlī and aššur-pliah lead to you and have him pack the textiles. give ... sacks ... send him to nahur ... my chisel ... let him bring there ... he brings to you.
9 shekels of tin: eluhut;
seal of aššur-imittī son of amur-luṣu, seal of abu-šalim son of aššur-emūqī. for these proceedings concerning ilī-bāni son of amur-aššur and ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar - they seized aššur's dagger and aššur-imittī son of amur-luṣu and abu-šalim son of aššur-emūqī heard their statement. ...
to puzur-adad, ladiya, ennam-aššur, enna-suen, aššur-idī, ikūn-pīya and lila from ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: of the 40 talents of good copper about which iddin-aššur reached an agreement with the investors, we have here satisfied in silver the investors for the 22 talents of good copper that was in ali-ahum's possession. thereof, for the 22 talents of copper, their shares, iliya, itūr-ilī and iddin-kūbum have received its value in silver. the rest of the copper, 18 talents 6 minas of copper, is in iddin-aššur's possession. apart from this nothing is in his possession. if ennam-aššur and ikūn-pīya take responsibility for their shares, they may receive their shares, but set witnesses for them. our dear lords, also, send us word, for a great many creditors who have received nothing remain.
the colony has passed a verdict stating that šalim-aššur must mention to the sons of iddin-abum his tablets for his witnesses to how much silver - all the silver - he has paid to cover iddin-abum's debt. he is to say: this silver i paid in different places.""
23.5 talents of wool, 66 fleeces, 10 black donkeys plus their harness, 25 textiles - all this in their second transport.
... i entrusted to šalim-wardī and šu-nūnu. witnessed by aššur-idī son of mu-mulānum, by aššur-taklāku son of ikūnum son of samaya.
ennam-aššur son of suen-nādā has received 13 minas of refined silver, and suen-nādā his son has received 5.3333 minas of refined silver . witnessed by aššur-imittī, by išme-ilum, by bi... son of hannāniya, by ilī-rē'ī son of šakṣum.
4 shekels of silver [... ... ...-aš]šur owes to the creditor. contracted in month xii. he will pay within a month. if he does not pay he will add as interest 0.3333 shekel per month year eponymy of aššur-nādā, week eponymy of the successor of karwaya. witnessed by aššur-idī
from buburānum to abiya and aššur-ṭāb; specifically to aššur-ṭāb: badiya has lived there since the month narmak-aššur, and you just kept silent. if you are truly my brothers, then hand him over to the very first caravan and let him come to the city, and i shall pay his fees. if he refuses to come, then it is important that he does not cheat you. bind him and have him brought.
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: 0.5 mina of silver that i acquired for myself(?) and you sent to me, 0.5 mina of silver under my seal ennānum son of kuziya brought to you. my dear brother, pay attention to the missives from the city that ennānum brought to you, and give it (an answer?) to the very first express transport so they may bring it. he should leave with the first travellers to depart.
from aššur-šadū'e, amur-šarrassa and šalim-wardī to ali-ahum: šalim-wardī brought 31 minas of tin under your seal. in accordance with your instructions we gave the tin to amur-šarrassa and šalim-wardī and they led it into the heartland, and they brought you (silver) at 6.5 shekels per (shekel) for your tin for you. thereof we deposited 3.5 shekels as transport tariff. šalim-wardī brings you 4.6666 minas 2.5 shekels of silver under our seals. we gave 1 shekel of silver for his disposal. with respect to šu-illil about whom we wrote to you, šu-illil son of mannum-kī-aššur promised 3 minas of silver to us. after šalim-wardī came šu-illil was gone. because of him we made šalim-wardī wait 10 or 20 days. when šu-illil arrives we shall send a final report to you.
to kuliya, say, thus says asānum: i am still staying (here) because of the meteoric iron. when they agree with the (quality / price of the) iron i will sell it, get ready and leave to you. as for your letter which arrived here concerning the axe, i have not yet recorded (the dispositions) of the witnesses. among my witnesses figures azu, the transporter of puzur-aššur. please, my lord, approach puzur-aššur and let him send azu to me, so that he can testify for me together with his colleagues. whithout my knowledge he has left for there, saying: i am going to elālī.""
to ennam-aššur and damiq-pī-aššur; specifically to damiq-pī-aššur from šāt-anna: i gave you 10 shekels of refined silver for purchases. three times i waited for the caravan together with those on the road to the city. pay the silver or the goods bought with it there to ennam-aššur.
to ennam-aššur from šāt-anna: as to the 2 minas 12.5 shekels of silver that i gave you, my dear brother, my dear lord, carry out the purchase yourself and send it with the very first transport. ... which i promised you, have him sell the textiles and the tin and send (the silver).
to ahātum; seal of ali-ahum and seal of iddin-abum.
of 1.5 talents 4 minas of good copper and 1 talent 14 minas of black copper that ali-ahum left, aššur-dugul took 31 minas of good copper as the price of ... enna-suen took ... 4 minas of copper. zikur-adad took 8 minas of good copper. 15 minas of copper were paid to his account as the price of a kutānu. 1 mina of black copper ... x minas of copper ... um-x took.
seal of ali-ahum son of elāli, seal of ennam-aššur son of enna-suen, seal of dan-aššur son of šalim-ahum, seal of pūšu-kēn son of sueyya. if aššur-taklāku has given a joint-stock investment to ennam-aššur, then he will receive 2 minas of silver out of the 1 talent 2 minas of silver in his certified tablet, belonging to ennam-aššur, and he will write down 3 minas of gold in the name of pūšu-kēn with his other investors. if aššur-taklāku has refused him, then pūšu-kēn will give 40? minas of silver, representing 10 minas of gold, within 46 weeks reckoned from the week of iddin-aššur and ikūnum, and pūšu-kēn will make ennam-aššur's joint-stock investment enter wherever it is favourable for him. if pūšu-kēn has not given a joint-stock investment to ennam-aššur (in time), pūšu-kēn must give 10 minas of refined silver to ennam-aššur. if ennam-aššur has refused, he must pay 10 minas of refined silver to pūšu-kēn. this memorandum is a copy of a certified tablet sealed by pūšu-kēn.
say to atata and kannutum, thus anah-ili: "(as for the) 0.5 mina of gold and 1.5 mina of silver, belonging to kannutum, which silver ili-bani, representing kannutum, entrusted to me - here ali-abum has caused me trouble and caused expenses of 1 mina of silver. he has now dragged me before the city and by verdict of the city ali-abum will take that silver and gold and ali-abum will be responsible for kannutum's interests. should kannutum come back on anah-ili, then ali-abum will clear him. the aforementioned silver and gold have been paid to the city office for (to cover) ili-bani's debts. over there, wherever goods ordered by ili-bani are available, seize for a value of 0.5 mina of pasallum gold and 1.5 mina of silver or what has been bought for it and take it at your own responsibility. i have a strong tablet of the city stating that the silver and gold belong to kannutum. and if kuliya comes in order to settle the affair, hold him in play until i arrive, do not settle the affair!"
seal of aššur-imittī son of dudiki, seal of uṣur-ša-aššur son of akuwa, seal of aššur-bāni, the dog". i paid 15 minas of -copper to the temple-funds on behalf of ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur."
0.5 mina for a working capital to uṣur-ša-aššur son of amriya; 0.3333 mina: aššur-bēl-awātim to his son and šāt-ilī;
30 minas of silver, its excise [added], his transport fee paid, under my seals, šu-kūbum brought to my investors and my representatives and to hinnāya. (entrusted to him) in the presence of amur-šamaš, son of mīšar-rabi, of amur-šamaš, son of harimtum. 2 minas of silver belonging to me; 1 mina of silver belonging to hinnāya, (sent) to meet the caravan; 1.5 mina of silver of ummī-išhara; 15 shekels of gold of lamassutum and aššuriš-tikal, thereof 35 shekels of silver of lamassutum (and?) 25 shekels of [silver] being [my?] temple funds - all this, its import tax [added], his transport fee [paid], under my seals, šu-kūbum brought to my representatives. in the presence of lā-qēp, son of izzizam-ilī, of aššur-nādā.
ennam-aššur seized us against ali-ahum and said to ali-ahum: come, let me question you!" ali-ahum answered: "why do you want to question me?" ennam-aššur said: "about the memoranda stating that i and you settled accounts. contest or confirm to me that they are sealed by you and me." ali-ahum answered: "as to the memoranda sealed by me and by you - yes, i do not contest my seal." ennam-aššur said: "keep in mind what was sworn by the city! bring my case to the city assembly and my lord." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by aššur-rabi son of lā-qēp, by ilī-bāni son of amur-ištar."
from kuzizya to ennam-aššur: in accordance with your message pilah-ištar gave me (access to) your store-room with the tablets - the container and your seal, sealed by alulaya. pilah-ištar said: we have taken the tablet of his harnessor somewhere, and then we placed it in the container and alulaya sealed it." ewarimuša brings you the container with the tablet; also, as you instructed, we have sent your tablets to purušhaddum. i wrote to you and said: "give the grain ... to(?) the lady." so, send word. you wrote, saying: "i shall give it." my dear brother, give it!"
of the 48 kutānus of the votive offerings: 5 kutānus i sold to the chief of mules for a price of 0.5 mina 7.5 shekels;
from kuziziya and amur-ištar to ali-ahum: your textiles ... in marithum, ... thin textiles that have been sold ... the rest of your textiles are available. the trade is at a stand-still. in accordance with your instructions we shall sell your textiles for the best available price, and we shall make for you either silver or gold.
certified tablets with my witnesses concerning the sons of iddin-abum.
to ennānum and ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: ennānum brings 20 minas of silver under my seal. ašdu weighed the silver with his one-mina weight for enah-ilī so let him give you a tablet with my seal. both of you should split (the envelope) ... and seal it again and leave it for aššur-nimrī. when you have weighed the silver send me the ... also, send me word with the first transport. my dear brothers, take care so he does not take any interest from me. i shall realise every mina of silver on the tin here for him.
alili and karšini owe 1 mina of silver to waldi-ilum and ištar-lamassī. they will give 1.5 mina of silver plus 2 sheep by the feast for tuhtuhānum. before your lord and your lady. witnessed by waldi-ilum and karnikašu.
to šalim-aššur from adad-rabi: as to the tablets concerning iddin-abum that you wrote to me about - i asked aššur-malik and šalim-aššur, saying: when issu-arik cleared up iddin-abum's affairs with merani, with the ištar-priest and zaktaya's firm, and where he gave him a free loan, at that time he paid what silver he could - and did they certify his tablets for the rest of the silver, stating that iddin-abum owed it, and that šalim-aššur was the guarantor?" they answered: "no tablet at all was certified. he sent us the silver and we paid the men." they continued: "it is true that issu-arik discussed with him in our presence and said: 'pay the debt of your brother, both here and abroad, and then go and take it again out of your brother's silver. if there is no silver belonging to your brother, then pay out of your joint-stock capital.'" for these words which issu-arik discussed with you in their presence i shall lead them off, and i shall receive a tablet with their statement in the gate of the god. as to the tablet concerning your share, we opened bēlātum's house, and there is only a single tablet, and it concerned your funds and was sealed by ukuwa and his partners. also, 2 memoranda are present. as for ennānum's son we searched for the tablet but it was not there. the city assembly has rendered a verdict in the sacred precinct concerning ibaya's son, stating that whoever has hired an attorney and received a tablet concerning extradition - in the city as well as abroad - their tablets are invalid. the kanesh colony will render a verdict concerning silver and gold. if a man makes a formal statement involving a deposition, he must reveal it to the colony, and if it concerns the three words he must go to the city; if it does not involve the three words he must not come to the city; he who comes anyway will not live. i seized aššur-malik and šalim-aššur and said: "you have heard the missive of šalim-aššur concerning grain. speak up and send word to the man about how much grain has been stored." they answered: "now pressure us for the grain, but our own free loans, where are they?" he may come and someone will take away the grain. they continued: "the last five years we have been unwilling to follow his orders." i said: "why are you angry?" they answered: "apart from the free loans that we gave to him we have no other quarrel with him." my dear father, my dear lord - do not treat me harshly because word from me has not reached you until today! i said to myself: "why should i send insulting words to him?" huraṣānum offered me 10 shekels of silver to dispose of there, but i said: "i have received a similar amount from šalim-aššur." so send me the money!"
1 -textile (and) 2 dark textiles belonging to šu-kūbum have been sold in burušhattum for 0.6666 mina of silver. from it they deducted the silver equivalent of 25 minas of copper for šu-kūbum's account and that of 15 minas of copper for my account. the rest of his silver is 14 shekels. thereof: 10 shekels of silver šalim-ahum gave in kanesh (and) i myself will pay 4 shekels of silver. of this amount you paid him 28 shekels of silver, 2 shekels of silver i gave him in tumeliya. 1.6666 shekel of silver fodder for the donkey and road-tax for it until wahšušana, 3 shekels of silver (expenses) for 30 textiles (transported) from ulama until burušhattum and (for) the cost of the inn.
habiya and his wife owe 0.3333 mina 1.5 shekel of silver to ali-ahum.
... save me while i can still be saved. of the 11 minas of silver from your tablet, 5 minas of silver ... the two minas of silver that you promised to pay during the journey and which you have not paid - send the silver. i shall buy good and lapis lazuli for you, and you will see that we shall take 10 minas of silver ... when i come up ... sell the tin and textiles for silver. pay attention to my outstanding claims with anatolians, have the silver paid and send it to me. i have seen good iron and good lapis lazuli here in the city hall, but as long as they have not paid the silver, they will not release the iron and lapis lazuli. my dear brother, take care to convert the tin and textiles to silver and then have some 10 minas of silver from my outstanding claims paid, and send me the silver so i can take out the iron and the lapis lazuli, and since in the palace gate ... they should come here. ... of others ...
sealed by buburānum; to abiya son of bebe and aššur-ṭab. ... abiya. if you are truly my brothers, take care!
to šalim-aššur from adad-rabi: here šu-ištar, aššur-malik and šalim-aššur heard (your letter), and they said: this matter is correct as he wrote about it in his letter. issu-arik spoke (thus) with us as witnesses." šu-ištar raised the matter and they said: "let šu-ištar take a lawsuit and we shall go down to the gate of the god and give you a tablet." ... in your letter ... both ali-ahum and ... aššur-malik and ... concerning puzur-šadu'e's son ... on one day ... at the gate of the god the tablet ... ibaya's son to ... we said: "the man will extradite the owner of a joint stock capital." ... x minas of silver ... belonging to a merhcant ... 4.3333 shekels of silver ... left 0.3333 mina ... 156 -textiles cost 12 minas 18 shekels of silver; 6 black donkeys cost 0.83333 mina 5 shekels; 1.6666 mina of silver, 5 shekels ... tin for expenses cost 2.3333 mina of silver; for 3 harnessors: 0.3333 mina 5 shekels each were their working capitals; 3 shekels of silver for their clothes; x mina less 1 shekel of silver: transport tariff; 8.3333 shekels of silver: export duty; 0.3333 mina 4 shekels of silver: both harness for the donkeys and their fodder - in all: 19 minas 4.3333 shekels of silver. pilah-ištar leads these goods to the merchant. 1 mina of his gold is available. ... 4 minas of silver. the rest of his silver: 4.83333 minas 5+x shekels. ... buy in 10 days ... if clothes and a thin textile are available i shall buy it. i shall buy ... and a good and ... i shall set out and leave."
to iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, kukawa, adida and ali-ahum from ennam-aššur: once or twice i have written to our father's representatives and to you about how to deal with our father's goods in a safe manner. in your instructions you keep writing to me about bringing the goods on the narrow track. you wrote: decide about the safety of your father's goods!" however, here the orders of the palaces, three of them, are strict, and they have made common cause. so, they have seized azuzaya's son on the narrow track and he is detained until this day. as to the silver that i wrote you about twice, and which he has not left for me, my dear fathers, every mina of -silver as saving our father's goods ... send me some of my father's silver with an express caravan so i can dispatch the goods. take care so i am not delayed and indeed, why is that there you have..."
from iluwa to sueyya: 49 textiles belonging to aššur-imittī, 1 textile belonging to būr-suen, 1 textile belonging to lā-qēp, 1 textile belonging to ikūn-pīya - in all i entrusted to zuba 52 textiles including those of the , plus 2 donkeys and their harness, and he leads it to huraṣānum. you and enna-suen should assist zuba there on our behalf and entrust the textiles to huraṣānum. he has been paid the smuggling-fee. entrust them with sealings on the hems. concerning 2 textiles that were lost they have not reached šu-ištar and elāli.
4 silver beads, the debt of ..., remains.
i sold x kutānu-textiles at x + 1.5 shekels a piece for 2 minas 6.5 shekels of silver to irnuid.
to ennam-aššur from šāt-anna: aluwa brings you 30 minas of good copper under my seal. convert it to silver there as best you can.
to ali-ahum and zukuwa from puzur-aššur: ennam-aššur brought 13 minas of tin there. my dear brothers, if he has given you the tin, then seal the tin and send it here. if he has given you silver together with the tin, then make a profitable purchase for me and send it here with the very first travellers. if damqaya is on his way to the city, then give him a mina of silver, and just as i brought up tin for him, he too should bring up tin without deductions for me.
the attorney of šalim-aššur's firm ababa seized us and made us approach ennam-aššur and ali-ahum (and said): according to the tablet of the city i shall collect all that šalim-aššur left behind and bring it to the city. come, show me the oustanding claims your father left and anything he left behind, then i shall assist you so they release it to you, and we can go to the city. yesterday i questioned you, saying: 'pay whatever silver your father set down as owed by you and then let us go to the city!' your brother ali-ahum answered: 'come, let me pay what silver my father wrote in the tablet, and then let us go to the city.' but you keep giving me harsh answers instead of paying the silver, and you refuse to pay the silver. do not obstruct me, but show me where your father's outstanding claims are! let me assist you and let us have the silver paid and let us go to the city. your brother ali-ahum shows me the silver his father wrote in the tablet, but you refuse to pay the silver your father wrote concerning you in the tablet, so you obstruct me. come along now! pay what your father wrote concerning you in the tablet in accordance with the tablet of the city! let us go to the city. do not obstruct me!" ennam-aššur answered the attorney ababa: "i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. yesterday you questioned me and i answered you, saying: 'at my father's death in durhumit i was not present. my brother ali-ahum assisted my father. they appropriated things illegally and my father wrote many things concerning me. i do not owe anything to my father of what is in this tablet.' come, let us go to durhumit where my father's assets are, let us take the assets and let us go to the city together with you in accordance with the tablet of the city, let us satisfy the eponym and let me discuss the testament of our father in the city with my brother and sister. if you say: 'i shall not go to durhumit!' then state that to me, and then come on and let us leave for the city even today. do not question me in court. i have not rejected you with respect to going!" ali-ahum answered the attorney ababa, saying: "i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. yesterday you questioned me and i answered you, saying: 'come along! let me pay what my father wrote of silver in the tablet, and then let us go to the city.' come, let me pay the silver today, and then let me show you our father's outstanding claims, so assist me and let us have the silver paid and go to the city in accordance with the tablet of the city.""
from aššuriš-tikal to ali-ahum: of the 9 talents 17 minas of copper for which you were booked in the office of the colony: you deducted 4.5 talents of bad copper for huma; annina recieved 2.5 talents 7 minas of bad copper; amur-ištar recieved 2 talents 10 minas of bad copper - total of your copper: 9 talents 17 minas of bad copper for which you were booked in the office of the colony.
from šukkutum to tanawišti and ištakušar: ennam-aššur has fled from me here. to ištakušar: seize him concerning the 5 that you gave him as an interest-free loan and make him pay the silver. if he contests you, then i have witnesses for him. if he does not give it to you then detain him. as to his house that akimātum sold to him, if he has received the silver from out of my silver there, then make him pay as well. if išhili asks you for textiles there do not give him any textiles. i shall set out on my journey and come.
the attorney whom you will contract against itūr-ilī - indicate his name in the tablet from the city. if the attorney has already left, (give) the tablets to an express transport, a reliable affiliated trader. here i am ready to pay every shekel of silver and satisfy him, even if i must turn to merchants regarding the silver (to borrow it), so do go to the city together with the merchant of my father and get hold of a tablet concerning the corresponding amount and ... a tablet from the city ...
... ... he sent to me. in accordance with the missive of ... 80 kutānu-textiles have been dropped.
a letter of assur-taklaku, son of hananna, to nakile'ad; a letter of nakile'ad to assur-taklaku, son of hanana; a tablet of the / a tamkarum, that has been valudated in hurama; and tablets of anah-ili.
1.5 mina of silver, the tithe, we collected from pusu-ken, son of buzazu, in kuburnat, and 1 mina of silver thereof su-suen, son of abi-lamassi, and assur-idi, son of adada, are bringing to the karum under the seal of the wabartum and my seal. for 0.5 mina of silver assur-malik, kurara's son, gave his promise in tuhpiya, he will pay to the karum. 15 shekels of silver we collected from alulaya's son in hanaknak and under our seals libaya and kubiya are bringing it. 0.3333 mana of silver, saddu'utu-tax, we levied from nimar-suen, son of dadiya, in durhumit. 1.5 shekels of meteoric iron, the tithe, we levied from sumi-abia, son of assur-elliti, and under the seals of karum durhumit i entrusted it in sinahuttum before the wabartum to su-anum, son of menanum, and mannum-ki-adad, who are bringing it to the karum. 10 shekels of silver, saddu'utu-tax, we levied from busia of kuburnat in tuhpiya and under our seals enlil-bani, the scribe, is bringing it to the karum. half a mina of silver, saddu'utu-tax, we levied from the servants of mannum-balum-assur, son of kukua. x silver, saddu'utu-tax, we levied from ... x-assur, son of ... and in ... we entrusted it to ... and under our seals he is bringing it to the karum. x silver ... in tismurna we levied from ... x-bani, and to ..., the son of anina we entrusted it ... of the son of hanana ... 4 shekels of silver, ... i took from assur-bani and serserum and in durhumit i sold them to istar-pilah, the interpretor, for 16 shekels of silver which i am carrying with me under the seals of the karum. 3 shekels of silver we levied from assur-taklaku, son of alahum and when the ruler of hattus went up to washaniya and to baniharsum ... ... a kutanu-textile for ... as payment for the textile ... adad-bani ... in hattus.
... let him come to you. i shall conclude his case. i shall not arrive empty-handed.
... 12.5 minas ... 3 minas of silver ... we added. 11 ... plus the import duty ... to the investors ... for you ... 15.3333 ... ...
to amurrum-bāni and šalim-aššur from šu-kūbum: i am leading 5 black donkeys, thereof 2 with -loads, to you. they belong to the merchant. urgent, the expense tin is inferior - what he gave me. urgent, the packet is not to be opened, urgent, send silver to me. the packet must not be opened.
šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī brought 12 thin textiles and 0.5 mina 3 shekels of lapis lazuli of nēreb / pu to kuziziya in wahšušana.
x + 5 minas of lapis lazuli, x + 1 talent of good copper, x black donkeys and their harness, 20 minas of šikku-copper, 110 bronze pins - to him ... ...
from da... (and ...) to ali-ahum: concerning the silver that ... and kammaliya have booked(?) you for, guides have ... the silver, and we seized the silver by force in a quarrel, and under the seal of amur-šarrassa i brought 1 mina of silver from the land of tahuruwa; we then seized him on the authority of the men of the palace, but they did not release the silver to us, but they bound us over for 2 minas of silver, until you give him their tablet. if you have not given their tablet together with puzur-malasu, we shall have to pay 2 minas of silver... to the men of the palace. urgent, give (them) their tablet. we have not seized anything other than 1 mina of silver. when you have given the tablet, bind over the palace. they should not sue us over the contract. for this reason we have sent you puzur-malasu. we have given 1 shekel of silver to him. had we not been cleared in your missive, ... would i have made him pay you the silver?
to kuliya, thus says ababaya: we are well, your youngsters are well and your people are well. like / instead of you ... of your father ... your words ... on me (?) ... who could give me ... by what you ... you have treated me ... do not ... since no letter of yours arrives here. what is the purpose of constantly writing me as follows: send me five textiles!" what should your youngsters eat, what should i (use to) pay for your expenditures if i had not for your father. he said: "he is destroying you ... he has evil intentions!" your daughter is / keeps ... with me she lives ... of our paternal house ... i have sold the savings and slaughtered the ox. the meat which remained they have below. i have spent 4 talents of copper ... your youngsters have not died!"
aššur-imittī son of etaya has received 17 minas of refined silver and 7.5 shekels of -gold from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by ennam-wēr son of šudaya, by il-ašrannī son of sukalliya, by enna-suen son of iddin-abum, by abūbu's younger son.
sealed by your representatives; to ennam-aššur. from aššur-massuʾī: ... i set ... and you do not send ... send ...
2 packages of 15 minas each plus a single package of 10 minas, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid - in all 42 ⅓ minas of refined silver under my seal, i entrusted to aluwa and enišārum, and i sent them to the city to šalim-aššur in accordance with his orders. furthermore, i paid 13 ⅓ minas of good copper for their expenses and 5 shekels of silver for their food. witnessed by ilī-bāni son of baši-ilum, by ahu-qar son of zurzur, by tūram-ilī son of eddin-aššur. furthermore, 10 ⅓ minas 3 ½ shekels of refined silver ..., ... ½ shekel interest that they took on my account, i paid for his debt to the wahšušana colony. the interest on the gold that remained of aššur-bēl-awātim's investment.
of the 48 kutānus we paid 2 kutānu-textiles in his chair(?).
5 shekels of silver for his sacrifice for our own enna-suen and isaya; 3 shekels for ikūn-pīya; 1 shekel of silver for his son; further, 18 shekels of silver, the proceeds from 2 textiles, is owed by his son;
to ilī-emūqī, šu-tammuzi, abiya, elaya and lamassī from adida and ali-ahum: after šalim-aššur died our father's customers to whom he owed silver there treated me and ennam-aššur badly, we were detained and our outstanding claims blocked, and you heard about it and went to the city assembly, and the city gave a verdict as follows: if šalim-aššur owed silver abroad, it must be proved with his tablet and witnesses and he (the creditor) may then receive his silver from the funds available; as for the debt that šalim-aššur owed in the city, noone could take any silver abroad. whoever took any would have to return it; who did not return it would have it taken away by force. ... the eponym ... šalim-aššur ... they will stand ... to the city ... ababa, the attorney brought a copy of the tablet of the city and they released all the silver that had been confiscated, but they detained us. after my brother died they still detain me today! sadly, my brother died. as my brother died, we sent the tablet of the city and the attorney ababa. our dear brothers, they should annul the tablet of the city of which ababa brought a copy, then go to the assembly and have the city hear the letter and take this tablet. i shall come in 6 months and i and my outstanding claims shall be released(?). let me clear my outstanding claims and come.
2 talents 10 minas of sealed tin, 52 good textiles, 3 black donkeys, sealed by aššur-bāni and bēlum-bāni and belonging to a merchant, they entrusted to puzur-a... puzur-a... entrusted these goods to ali-ahum. witnessed by aššur-bāni son of kutaya, by damiq-pī-aššur son of warad-ilīšu, (grand)son of aššur-idī.
to uṣur-ša-ištar and aššur-bāni from ali-ahum: you have taken the spoon with which they anointed you with oil. the spoon is not worth 0.5 shekel of copper, but i became upset as if it was worth 10 or 20 shekels of silver. give it to uṣur-ša-ištar there so he can give it to the maid. if you have not give it, i shall be upset.
... they bring you for 5 pairs of shoes. send me šu-bēlum.
4 talents of tin plus its extras, sealed in the city, 20 including 12 of low quality for wrapping, further, 20 , the share that the palace took for pre-emption, have been transferred to šalim-aššur's account - in all šalim-aššur has received 40 and 5 black donkeys from the merchandise that arrived with šu-kūbum's transport. the rest of his textiles, 45 including his textiles of good quality, are in šalim-aššur's house under šu-kūbum's seal. the palace received 3 as import duty; the palace received 3 from the wrapping of good quality, and 2 were lost in the palace. šu-kūbum has paid 15 minas of tin on top of his expense tin as balance to šalim-aššur. witnessed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by puzur-anna son of iddin-adad. the accounts concerning the tithe concerning the office of the colony have not yet been settled.
to šalim-aššur from šu-tammuzi, adida, elaya and lamassī: when you left ... you said: lulu's son aššur-ṭāb ... at least 10 minas of silver ..." ... the king will receive its / his tithe. later the man went to the city assembly and said: "he gave it to me for purchases. i was entrusted with a credit for 5 years." he asked for a favour from the city assembly, and his representative will set his terms for a year and ... his representative ... whether you entrusted on credit ..."
from man-mahir to ali-ahum: inform me whether or not they have brought in the textiles from luhuzattiya. if they have brought them in, then convert them to silver as i instructed you. my dear brother, take care to raise every shekel of silver. smuggling them cost 7.5 shekels of silver. they asked for 0.6666 minas of silver from enna-suen but give them 7.5 shekels. let the rest of the silver be with you.
seal of zuba, son of ennānum,
5 minas ... of silver, its transport tariff paid, under my seal and the seal of bēlānum i entrusted to ilī-pilah.
seal of baziya, šu-hubur and kulma-kulma; missive from man-mahir stating that i released 3 minas of silver to them.
ištar-lamassī gave 0.3333 mina 3 shekels of silver to puzur-aššur for purchases.
to ešarra and ab-šalim from ennam-aššur: 10 shekels of silver and an undergarment sealed by me is for ešarra. 10 shekels of silver and 2 sashes are for ab-šalim and the girl. 2 shekels of silver is for ... sister ištar-lamassī ...
10 talents 10 minas of tin sealed in the city, 223 textiles and 24 black donkeys - all this ennam-aššur received.
... his profit. come on! pay in accordance with the verdict of the city, and then let us go to the city. do not obstruct me." this is not a formal lawsuit but a witnessed questioning. "i submit to the tablet from the city and my lord's attorney." ennam-aššur said to ababa: "it is you who have seized me before these men and you have questioned me in court. it is you who came as an attorney, but ali-ahum said: 'i shall question my brother ...' it was us that he questioned and he took our answers away to the city. when our father died in durhumit i personally was not present, but my brother ali-ahum took care of my father. they appropriated things illegally and my father wrote what he wished. i do not owe anything to my father. come on, let us take the copper in durhumit, the assets, and let us go with you to the city in accordance with the verdict of the city and let us satisfy the eponym with the assets of our father and let me discuss the testament of our father in the city with my brother and my sister ... the attorney ... the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ... by suen-damiq, son of aššur-imittī."
to dan-aššur and aššur-... from ...: illil-bāni brings you 5 minas of refined silver. together with that from the caravan ... of good quality ... akkadian ... investments. buy either clothes ... or or abarnian or , or or or what is right for you of all these ..., both of good and of superior quality, and do not spare a single shekel on each. if this type of purchase is not available, ... the palaces. buy today for every shekel of silver that results either or (a textile) with a shining face or tin. my dear brothers, with respect to my instructions i have written you five times - when you have heard my letter have aššur-rabi and ... ship 30 textiles of good quality, some 1 talent 55 minas of tin and what is purchased with this silver. if ikūn-pī-aššur arrives there, he and aššur-rabi will ship it. also, as for the rest of your textiles, leave them for dan-aššur. if it is not fitting for donkeys to go, ... spend 10 shekels ... and to ikūn-pī-aššur ... before you to ... before him ... where they will save ... decide about my goods. to aššur-...: you too ...
of the 16 ⅚ minas of lapis lazuli from the votive offering to aššur that i received from man-mahir in šalatuwar, thereof i entrusted 10 ⅓ minas of lapis lazuli from the votive offering under the seal of the merchant and on behalf of the merchant to kudātum son of amur-ištar, and i sent him away to make purchases. i said: act in accordance with the missive of the merchant that was written to dan-aššur and to you and ... silver and ... iron; do not release it on credit but send it as soon as possible." witnessed by kukuwa son of budātum, by lāqēp son of ...šaša. before i received the silver, the proceeds from this iron, i sent 10 minas of refined silver - its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for - in the name of aššur-ṭāb to the city for purchases with enna-suen. for all this - i sent(?) the proceeds from ⅚ mina 1 shekel of lapis, 1 ⅚ minas 3+x shekels of silver with ali-abum, and i received the proceeds from 2 minas x shekels of lapis that ... 3 ⅔ minas 8 shekels. itur-ilī took ½ mina of lapis lazuli worth 1 mina of silver. the rest ..."
5 minas of silver is owed by aššur-taklāku. reckoned from the week of amur-ištar and aššur-bēl-awātim ... month teʾinātum, eponymy of amur-aššur son of karriya, he will pay interest at the rate of 1.5 shekel per month per mina.
to aššur-massuʾī, šu-kūbum and aluwa; specifically to aššur-massuʾī from ennam-aššur: you spoke to me here, saying: in my ... i shall send you 5 shekels of silver for the price of your textile to my maid mula with your servant. buy her a textile, and until i come give her provisions regularly." you wrote with aluwa, saying: "give her 5 shekels of silver of your own money." i shall give her 5 shekels of silver of my own money, as you wrote me. in addition to the 5 shekels of silver from aššur-ṭāb plus the price of my textile that she put on, announce to aluwa with šu-kūbum as witness how much you will add to the 5 shekels for the price of my textile, and give it, so it may come with hudubēlī. sned me a fine thin textile with aluwa and as much ... to mula ... small goods ... why have you not informed me? i said: "he must not make you (fem.) angry." i keep giving her clothes and provisions. send me word, and ..."
to aššur-malik, šalim-aššur and adad-rabi from šalim-aššur: irišum brought 4 talents of tin, -textiles from the wrapping plus top-packs, belonging to issu-arik, and 2 black donkeys. ... minas of tin and its wrapping ... a black donkey issu-arik ... they paid ... three ... let the tin be removed there from the container ... give the tablet ...
5 minas 22 shekels i paid to the fund; 2 minas i gave to the lady; 2 minas šamaš-bāni gave her; 45 shekels when šalim-bēlī had come here i gave to the lady; 0.5 mina when šamaš-bāni had come here (and) 0.5 jar of wheat (and?) 0.5 mina (of copper) i gave her.
dada will bring 1 textile from apum, a fine tisābu, when he comes up.
say to baziya, thus arunahšu: where is the god by whom the oath was sworn? he surely knows that we eat bread and drank the cup (together)! my dear brother, i do not need the interest on my silver, send me (only) my silver capital. as for what you talk about here, i did not withhold anything from harziga. barley and whatever he needs i will give. the woven cloth of the lady i gave you is not bad! send its price to me. if you are my brother, send me a lump of black copper with somebody. am i not short of food? i am not hungry, i am satisfied! i am not considering a journey. god may be witness between us!""
to šalimma ... from bēlātum: why is it that you keep ...? ... aššur, the female diviners and the spirits ...i to her god ... to the city apart from your father ... our father ... you there ...
to kuliya, son of ali-abum, hanunu, son of ennum-assur, usur-sa-assur, son of puzur-assur [and assu]r-lamassi, son of assur-nada, [seal of] pilah-istar son of assur-nada.
i paid 4 shekels for a scarf of -weave, 1.3333 shekel for a wagonload of reed; i paid 1.6666 shekel for ; i paid 0.3333 mina of silver for an abarnian textile, 1 / 6 shekel for a piece of dried meat, 1 / 4 shekel for onions, [x shekels for] [x] bags of wheat... ...;[i paid ... ... ... ... ... ...] shek[els for] ?, [... ... ... ...] for a ... ... ... ...; i paid 0.6666 shekel for firewood; 0.6666 shekels i paid for chaff, for a double load i paid 0.5 shekel; 1 / 4 shekel for the blacksmith. i supplied 95 drinks to .. at 52.5 grains (of silver) each, 0.5 shekel for ... ... ... 1 / 6 shekel for ... for ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
[thus ... ... ... ... ... ... ...] s[ay to ... ... ... ...]-aššur [and] šumi-abiya: please, my fathers, my lords, take care to open, the very day šumi-abiya arrives, my tablet boxes and entrust the tablet of zuba to šumi-abiya to bring it across. and when you entrust the tablet (declare) that the tablet has to go overland in the name of zuba. because of this i am staying here now for a year and i could not go to the city. the man ... ... ... ... after ... ... ... ... to the hands of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... šumi-abiya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... he must give to me ... ...""
10 shekels of silver i gave to adida.
seal of pilah-ištar, son of ibisua, seal of šumma-libbi-aššur, son of kuskusum, seal of ennam-suen, son of amur-šamaš, seal of āl-ṭāb, son of amur-šamaš, (to the effect) that the debtof ennam-suen andāl-ṭāb, sons of amur-šamaš, is 3.5 minas 5 shekels of refined silver. from the week of aššur-imittī and amur-ištar they will add per 1 mina2 shekels per month as interest.for the silver they are jointly liable. month ii,eponymy of the one who took over from sukkalliya.
from ikūn-pīya to ibnī-ilī, būr-aššur and ennam-aššur: aššur-bāni left 14 -textiles for the wife of šu-ištar son of šukkutum under his seal with you and you were to sell the textiles. sell them as well as you can and take the silver, seal the silver and let it remain in a house belonging to one of you. my dear brothers, ... of my textiles ... to ennam-aššur: for 0.3333 mina of silver an was deposited; for 13 shekels of silver one golden ring and a cup of silver was deposited; for 4 1 / 4 shekels of silver a was deposited. in all 0.5 mina 7 1 / 4 shekels of silver as sureties your sister gave to you, and ... -silver ... my dear brother, ...
a jar: puzur-ennam; a jar: galgaliya; a jar: aššur-nimrī; a jar: mannum-kī-aššur; boiled meat and a jar: ah-šalim; boiled meat and a jar: man-mahir; a jar: lipit-anum;
to innaya from husārum and tarām-kūbī: aššur-ṭāb brought 15 minas of silver from your votive offering. it is deposited in the aššur-temple.
seal of ennānum son of šu-bēlum, seal of uṣur-ša-aššur son of amurriya. uṣur-ša-aššur son of amurriya owes 13.5 shekels of refined silver to irišum. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī and amur-ištar he must add interest at the rate 0.3333 shekel per month.
603 -textiles under my seal, thereof 100 -textiles, of secondary quality; 35 textiles of extra-fine quality, thereof 3 -textiles that were sealed with ilī-wēdāku's seal, but which are reserved for me - in all 638 textiles under my seal, apart from those belonging to the harnessors; further, 46 textiles, both abarnian, -textiles of extra-fine quality, -textiles and -textiles. 2 textiles belonging to šēp-ištar, 3 belonging to aššur-kāšid, 3 belonging to šu-nūnu, 2 belonging to atata, 3 belonging to lulu, 2 belonging to aššur-rē'i - in all 17 -textiles belonging to a harnessor. 20 talents of tin, a package, including the expense-tin, under seal; 5 minas each (the weight of) the extras on the package; 64 donkeys and their harness; 2 textiles of the ; 2 minas of refined silver of ali-ahum; 9 robes of -type, 2 -textiles of good quality, 1 talent of scrap metal, 600 nails, thereof 86 yellow ones, 30 litres of sweet oil, 15 litres of first class oil, 22 shekels of carnelian, 100 -stones - all this i gave him to dispose over.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, inah-ilī, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: 603 , thereof 100 of secondary quality; further, 35 of extra-fine quality, thereof 3 that were sealed with ilī-wēdāku's seal are reserved for me; further, 46 -textiles, both and of of extra-fine quality - in all 684 textiles, apart from those belonging to the harnessors; 20 talents of sealed tin and 5 minas each of extras, together with the expense tin; 34 black donkeys and their harness, 2 textiles of the , 2 minas of refined silver, 8 robes of -type, 2 of fine quality, 1 talent of scrap metal ... 3 textiles ... 2 belonging to the harnessors ... ali-ahum and šēp-ištar bring to you. my dear brothers, assist with my goods in the palace so there will be no unlawful activity and i shall not become worried. when my goods come down from the palace, give 6 talents 6 minas of sealed tin and 30 as a share to ennam-bēlum, and in accordance with his tablet (stating) that ennam-bēlum must pay 55.6666 minas 5 shekels of refined silver within 13 months, send 2 talents and 30 to tišmurna to ennānum so he can make some silver. give 2 talents of tin and 30 to aššuriš-tikal, 2 talents of tin and 30 to hannaya and let them make at least 10 minas of silver. the rest of my tin ... that has been marked -tin" on the front of the bundles ... ennam-aššur and ali-ahum should have them enter ... give instructions ... of the copies of my tablets ... have them pay so some 10 minas of silver ... will enter and i shall take my consignment ... of iddin-kūbum and ennam-aššur ..."
thus kaniš, say to the datu-payers, our messenger kuliya, the plenary of kuburnat hanaknak and tišmurna: as soon as you hear our letter, produce the dagger of assur in the presence of our messenger kuliya and whoever over there carries meteoric iron, whether he has already sold it to a palace or has not yet sold it and still carries it, make him pay the tithe on the meteoric iron and his -tax of 3 shekels of silver per mina. let kuliya personally(!) bring it here. if one protests and declares: the meteoric iron belongs to a man with an account, still take the tithe and his -tax and let come here to swear an oath by aššur's dagger then we will give his -tax back. we hear that an assyrian, tūʾimum, has brought in 30 donkeys by way of the -road. not just tūʾimum, but anybody who has brought in a loaded donkey by way of the -road in order to do buisness there, or if an inhabitant of a has brought up (goods) - produce the dagger of aššur and people shall not spare eachother! charge everyone his -tax at arate of 3 shekels of silver per mina, and make him pay the silver and let kuliya personally(!) bring it here. if somebody protests, saying: i will go clear myself in kanesh, (still) make him pay the silver and let him come here afterwards in order to clear accounts with us. take care that our messanger kuliya is not delayed. make people pay the silver, don't allow them to make trouble there!
to the envoys of the city and (other) travellers from kurub-ištar and his caravan: lapis lazuli belonging to šalim-aššur son of issu-arik was lost in the city and adida brought us a letter from the city assembly ... the goods ... to swear .. in accordance with the letter from the city assembly he must search and impose an oath. if you discover the lapis lazuli then give the lapis lazuli and the one who took it to the caravan and have it brought to the city.
ennum-ilī further took 6 shekels of refined silver as a working capital.
from hannaya to aššur-imittī and karriya: i gave 1 mina of silver to šalim-aššur's daughter. he certified the tablet concerning šalim-aššur's daughter, adida, šu-tammuzi and elaya. al-ahum has paid me the silver here, so open for my tablets there and give the tablet concerning the debt of šalim-aššur's daughter, adida, šu-tammuzi and elaya to šalim-aššur's daughter. i have been paid the silver.
within 15 days (it is) the week of enna-suen son of kurara and aššur-malik son of lā-qēp. if alu son of adudu has not come within 5 days and answered me in court, i shall deduct the money i took from my interest and then he must pay the silver and its interest in accordance with his tablet, without a verdict or an oath. witnessed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by nāb-suen son of ešu-bāni, by lā-qēp son of izzizam-ilum. i impressed upon them what was sworn by the city.
from kuziziya to ennam-aššur: šu-bēlum and aluwa brought me 4 akkadian textiles. concerning aluwa who was sent to purušhaddum to gather information - there is unrest in purušhaddum; there is no possibility to enter the road to either ulama or šalatuar or here to šabaya. for that reason i have returned aluwa to you. ulama has... with purušhaddum. your textiles were stored and as they were not sold they were treated badly. i gave them to a fuller for repairs with aluwa as witness. write how much grain you have given to the lady. 4 sacks should be in her possession, so send me word for there is no silver. i shall send it to you with the proceeds from your textiles.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: the day elāli arrives he must not stay. give him orders in accordance with my missive and send him. he must not delay a single day. my partners have abandoned me(?); you have caused my death. we have written to kuššara. the overseer will travel here and we shall go in a convoy. do not detain elāli. i am alone. elāli should travel in secret. until ... i am alone. i have no one to guard the goods.
... i shall go ... inform us.
... gift [...] ... we bought and 1.5 mina of your silver is due from ennanum [...] of silver he took [...] he said: [... sil]ver in [...] ... [...] silver.
itūr-ilī and enah-ilī said to ali-ahum: go, open for your father's and your brother's tablets, and collect every single shekel's outstanding claim to your father, and pay it to cover your father's debt." witnessed by adida son of warad-ilišu, by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of alili."
to adida, ali-ahum and abaya; specifically to abaya from damiq-pī-aššur: you wrote as follows: your tin was sold at the rate 1:8. 1 abarnian textile was sold for 0.5 mina 0.3333 shekel. for the second one they offer 0.3333 mina 5 shekels." as to both the 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver, the price of a textile, the 21 minas of copper that i left with you, as well as the silver that abaya brought to you, the silver that i owe to ṭāb-ṣill-aššur - pay the silver, take out my tablet, split the tablet and place it among my other tablets. abaya and mezitānum and the donkeys ..."
from ikūn-pī-aššur to iliya and kura: šu-bēlum son of alulaya owes me a deposit of 4.5 minas of silver. i sent my servants to him in hanaknak to have the silver paid, but he cheated my servants and hid himself from them and went to the city. my dear sons, i have written you once or twice but you have sent me no answer at all. as you have heard my letter take care to send me word with anu-pī-ištar and my brother to inform me what from him you have seized and hold in your possession. send me 5 good textiles from sukaya's transport with anu-pī-ištar and my brother. to iliya: the textiles that you ... to the merchant ...
... i gave pilah-ištar son of aššur-rē'ī for purchases.
to uṣurānum, ennam-aššur and ibni-adad from ṣill-adad: ibni-adad brings you 2.5 talents of and 9 jars of acorns. my dear brothers, offer the and the acorns for sale. ibni-adad must not tarry 5 days, send him. if the silver, the proceeds of the and the acorns does not cover the price of 10 talents of wool, ibni-adad shall add the missing silver. the grinding-stone that ennam-aššur has, offer that for sale and let him take the silver for it, and give both of my tablets concerning my debt to ibni-adad so he can bring them. to ennam-aššur: my dear brother, do not covet interest there and do not send me to court with him. i too am a man of favors. ... they bring you 2 they bring you.
3 talents 15 minas of tin under seals, 4 dark textiles, its wrapping, 17 -textiles, 16.6666 minas of loose tin, 2 black donkeys - in all 4 talents 18 minas of tin, the value of iliya('s shipment). from the city until kanesh the toll-and-fees amounted to 4 minas 6 1 / 4 shekels per talent, the head-tax to 15 shekels per person. i paid 17 minas 54 shekels. 16.6666 shekels shortage of hand tin. for 4 porters from timilkiya until hurama at 26 shekels each i paid 1 mina 44 shekels (of tin). 3 minas 45 shekels (of tin) food for 2 donkeys and a donkey-driver and for their stay in a paddock. they took the donkeys away during the campaign and i paid 50 shekels of tin to redeem them. 36 shekels of tin for 1 textile of kukū, 5 shekels for his sandals. in all 24 minas 10.83333 shekels. after the 16.83333 minas of hand tin had been spent 8 minas 30.6666 shekels of tin will be balanced (to him). of the 17 -textiles they took 1 as import-tax, they balanced him 2.5 shekels of silver; 1.5 textile and 1.5 shekel of silver (balanced) are his tithe. his share in the losses amounted to 1.5 shekels of silver. for the 2.5 textiles which the palace took, aššur-ṣulūlī received 0.5 mina of silver. separately aššur-ṣulūlī took 5 11 / 12 shekels of silver as his one-third-share. the rest of his textiles, 12 pieces, 3 talents 15 minas of tin with your seals, 4 dark textiles, its wrapping, 2 black donkeys with their harness, i entrusted to aššur-ṣulūlī in the presence of šu-bēlum, son of amur-ilī, (and) of puzur-aššur, son of itūr-ilī.
seal of šu-bēlum son of kuziziya; to ali-ahum son of adad-ellat, (grand)son of ataya. my dear brother, pay heed to the words of the letter and let your message be left with azu.
meari owes 1 mina 2 shekels of silver to ali-ahum. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī, month ša-kēnātim, in the eponymy after that of aššur-imittī, he will add interest at the rate of 2 shekels (per mina) per month. witnessed by šuppun-ahšu, by annali his mother.
iddin-abum owes 20 minas of washed copper to man-mahir. month kuzallu, eponym of buzutaya. he must pay in one year. if he has not paid in time, he must pay interest at the rate 1 mina per ten minas per month. witnessed by ṣilluš-dagān, by aššur-bāni.
1 mina 7.5 shekels of refined silver āmur-ištar, son of dada, owes to elamma. from the week of ali-ahum and amurrum-bāni he will pay in 11 weeks; if he does not pay he will add 1.5 shekel as interest per mina per month. month ii, eponymy of the successor of ilšu-rabi, son of baziya. in the presence of imdī-ilum, son of šu-labān, of ememe'i, son of azutaya.
9 shekels of silver owed by aššur-šamšī and kutaba i hold as security.
to enna-suen and ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: 3 shekels of silver - for 2.5 shekels of silver i rented 0.6666 of a hired man and i left the maid in wašhaniya, and i wrote to them but they do not bring her here. but as for you, you kept quiet and made me a non-gentleman. when i heard i was unhappy. the very day you hear my letter, spend some 5 shekels of silver, whatever you can, so they can bring the maid here. i cannot pay the silver. by my friends! - i have not sold her here. to enna-suen: it is not your ... and he hired 0.83333 hireling ... my dear brother, let him bring the maid here. they should not speak about ... my slave.
seal of amur-šamaš son of miššu-rabi, seal of nabi-suen son of illil-bāni, seal of ikūn-pī-aššur son of šu-ištar. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
to ilī-bāni and kuliya, to ilī-bāni in particular say, this is what aššur-ennam says: in šalatiwar kuliya gave me 0.83333 mina of silver under his seal. i brought it to wahšušana to you and i said to you: take this silver and pay (with it) the -tax on behalf of kuliya, as you promised." you answered: "indeed, i did promise to pay the silver." in the presence of aššur-lamassī, son of aššur-mālik, and šū-išhara, son of enna-suen, the ..., i entrusted it to you under the seals of your brother. what did my paternal house that your brother came back on me? in al-timniyē, in the presence of uzua, son of kukulānum and enna-suen, son of iddin-abum, you seized me, saying: "when you gave me the silver with my brother's seal, who was then m?" i answered: "were aššur-lamassī and šu-išhara not ? and it was in their presence that i entrusted you the silver with my brother's seals.""
aššur-bāni son of šalim-aššur, lā-qēp son of izzizam-ilum, ennānum son of amriya; further, aššur-bāni, al-ṭāb and elāli as witnesses concerning šu-bēlum and aššur-taklāku.
x minas of refined silver, x shekels of pašallu-gold, x minas of good copper, x minas of tin, x minas of scrap ...
seal of the kanesh colony in plenary session. the kanesh colony in plenary session passed the following verdict: [x] mina of silver, [the working] capital of zikum to aššur-idī ir'am-aššur shall pay.""
... seal the proceeds in silver from the textiles and send me ewarimuša with the first transport. he must not delay. if he does not enter ... the silver proceeds from the textiles ... also, why have you written as follows: you must not touch the grain under my seal." also ... in my father's house ..."
2 minas 41.1666 shekels of silver as one third part of ennam-suen's caravan i will collect; 5 minas 22.6666 shekels from the holding of that caravan i will collect.
from kuziziya to ennam-aššur and šu-bēlum; (specifically) to ennam-aššar: my dear brother and son, i personally take responsibility here. just as i toil for your father i also exert myself for you. ... they will bring ... from marithum, and then i shall send you 10 talents of silver and 10 talents of good copper. šu-bēlum should not stay there, send him. also, if you are truly my brother, ... to the lady there. ... or sacks of grain.
say to elamma and kurub-ištar, say especially to kurub-ištar, thus kūn-ilum: when ēnah-ilī brought my merchandise here and one counted the textiles in the palace in your presence, you gave 16 textiles to / as ... and you brought (the rest ?) safely to ... he has / will indeed take(n) along from the silver that is due by ...""
0.5 mina of refined silver šumi-abiya owes to elamma. from the week of ilī-nādā he will add 1 shekel of silver as interest per month. month i, eponymy of puzur-nirah. in the presence of adad-pilah, of ennam-aššur, son of puzur-aššur.
10 minas of good copper at the rate 0.83333 shekel, 0.5 litre of oil he balanced with me because of zukuwa; all this bēlum-bāni son of aššur-bēl-awātim owes to ali-ahum.
22 dark textiles, 11 minas 10 shekels of tin 12 shekels of silver the price of 0.5 -textile, (and) 2.5 minas of silver, the price of 5 donkeys, are due by ali-ahum. concerning 2 donkeys belonging to elamma and lā-qēp, ali-ahum and hinnaya will establish who of them is liable and from him who proves to be it elamma and lā-qēp will take 0.5 mina of silver per (donkey). in the presence of edināya, of ennam-aššur.
seal of šu-nūnu son of amur-ištar. tablet with my testimony before the šugarri'ā'um of aššur. the šamuha station gave me, and i gave the tablet.
thus šu-kūbum, say to aššur-ṭāb: why do you keep writing me about the silver? aššur-mālik and kurub-ištar have settled my case and at that time i immediately paid 3 minas of silver to kurub-ištar. the rest of the silver i have now paid to kurub-ištar. moreover, i have written to you several times: 'by all means stop writing me about the silver!' abu-šalim has taken nothing (of it), abu-šalim actually witnessed that my affair was settled!""
from itūr-ilī to ennam aššur: as to the matter concerning your father where i paid the balance for the owners of the silver and to which they would not agree, today the men have agreed. they said: write so that the man's sons come here, and then you yourself decide what is fitting." urgent, is it not fitting with up to 5 minas of silver? clear yourselves, come and take up the matter. send 1 talent of washed copper ... the other ... of good quality ... on my journey ... and take washed copper for 10 minas of silver at the rate of x minas of copper or higher, and send me word so i may pay the silver here. also, i shall send a donkey to you. aššur-ṭāb son of azuzaya owes me 1 mina 10 shekels of silver. i have his certified tablet. the silver will come back . if ama'i will sell his goods for silver and has left on the narrow track, then he and you should seal 2.3333 minas of silver and send it to me and to his representatives. it should pass overland in his name. have them pay the silver and ... the tablet. if he starts a legal complaint, and he is on his way to burušhaddum ... šu-laban, ilī- ... 2.3333 minas of silver ..."
from man-mahir and damiq-pī-aššur to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur.
1 jar of wheat, 3 sacks of straw is owed by aššur-malik son of aššur-šamšī;
šu-bēlum and ennam-aššur reached the following agreement with ummī-išhara and šu-bēlum: 6.6666 minas of silver of the house of hinnāya, 4 minas of silver of kurub-ištar, son of ali-ahum and from the 'pot' of ištar-pilah 1.3333 mina of silver have been deposited for them. as for this silver, pilah-ištar and šu-bēlum have in favor of ummī-išhara and ennam-aššur dropped their right on a share <by giving them> a house-plot of 3 , which the committee of five had given them. when ummī-išhara and ennam-aššur effectuate a clearance with the investors of their father elamma they will acquire their plot. month x, eponymy of ennam-suen, son of šu-ištar. they will effectuate the clearance of their plot for them within three years. if they fail to do so, they will acquire 3 minas of the silver of kurub-ištar and so satisfy themselves with the value of their plot and will not vindicate their plot. on 3 minas of the silver of kurub-ištar a claim of pilah-ištar and šu-bēlum now rests. if the clearance has been effectuated they will be cleared together with their brothers. ir'am-aššur represented ummī-išhara. if any of the (other) sons of elamma vindicates the 3 minas of silver of kurub-ištar, on which a claim of pilah-ištar and šu-bēlum rests, ennam-aššur and ummī-išhara will clear them. in the presence of iddin-adad, son of šu-ištar, of ennam-[aššur, son of ṣilli-ištar, of ennānum, son of abussa, of šu-anum, [son of lā-qēp. in accordance with the testamentary dis[positions applying to them.
2 minas 57 shekels of silver under the seals of ennam-aššur, son of elamma, šu-suen, son of iliya, entrusted to lamassutum and ir'am-aššur and ir'am-aššur will bring the silver to the city of assur. he will pay it for the debt of ennam-aššur to the creditor. the silver will travel overland in the name of ennam-aššur. witnessed by pilah-ištar, son of elamma, and by aššur-bāni, son of dumuq-ištar.
to nabi-suen,
31 dark textiles of iddin-suen, 21 dark textiles of aššur-rē'ī, 11 dark textiles of šu-ištar, 11 dark textiles of ennam-suen, 8 textiles as import-tax, 10 textiles are pre-emption, 33 textiles used for wrapping, 12 textiles whose seals are lacking, 3 textiles lost.
say to ennam-aššur and dadiya, thus elamma: 15 minas of silver, its excise added, karwāya is bring to you. 15 shekels of gold, its excise added, 0.6666 mina of silver, its excise added, aššur-mūtappil is bringing you. give 0.6666 mina of silver to aššur-taklāku, son of lū-rab'āku, and ask him for my debt-note. if he is not present, elalī!, son of sūaya, is his representative. pay 0.6666 mina of silver to ali-ahum, son of ēnah-ilī, and ask him for the 1 mina of silver he still owes and add it to that of the paternal estate that belongs to ali-ahum and me jointly and then report to me. if, following my earlier instruction that i sent to you, you have already purchased 30 minas of silver, then use 1 mina of this amount for buying akkadian textiles. buy for the present silver tin.""
from šalim-aššur to ali-ahum, šēp-ištar and aššur-kāšid: 603 -textiles, thereof 100 of secondary quality; further, 15 of extra-fine quality, thereof 3 that were sealed with ilī-wēdāku's seal, but which are reserved for me; further, 46 abarnian textiles, both -textiles and of of extra-fine quality - in all 684 textiles, apart from those of the harnessor; 20 talents of sealed tin plus 5 minas each for the extra packs, including expense tin; 34 black donkeys and their harness; 2 textiles of the , 2 minas of refined silver, 8 robes of -type, 2 of good quality, 1 talent of scrap, 600 nails, thereof 86 green ones, 25 litres of oil, 12.5 litres of first class oil, 22 shekels of carnelian, 100 stones, ... 3 minas of bronze pins ... plane logs, 2 minas ... 60 litres of saffron, 30 minas of cedar and fragrance, 10 sacks ... of extra quality for ... 2 sacks - all this i gave to ... 2 textiles belonging to šēp-ištar, 3 textiles belonging to aššur-kāšid, 3 textiles belonging to šu-nūnu, 2 textiles belonging to adada, 3 textiles belonging to lulu, 2 textiles belonging to aššur-rē'i - in all 17 i entrusted. of my textiles 100 are of secondary quality, 35 of extra-fine quality; 46 abarnian textiles, -textiles and -textiles of of extra-fine quality - in all 181 you must smuggle and let them be deposited in timelkiya. the rest of the textiles and my tin you must bring into kanesh, and as my goods come down from the palace, my representatives shall give 6 talents of tin and 30 to ennam-bēlum, and they shall certify his tablet for 55.6666 minas of refined silver. all my harnessors must assist ennam-aššur and ali-ahum on the road to either burušhaddum or durhumit or tišmurna wherever you can make a single shekel of silver, so make at least 10 minas of silver for me, and send it as soon as possible to kanesh. do not release a single shekel of silver to agents on credit.
... 0.83333 minas of silver owed by ...huzānum; he will pay when he returns. 14.5 minas owed by šalim-aššur; he will pay from the week of ennamaya in 20 weeks.
thus ner'amtum, say to elamma: they are bringing you a thin textile and a normal one, together with your merchandise, and a shawl for lamassutum. as for the matter about which you wrote me, the gentleman has perished / disappeared. to whom should i speak? i am staying here and i am unable to answer for it. we were not to bring in the house somebody to replace my son, (but) because i became afraid, i was the one who has now brought one in. do not get angry!""
to aššur-nimrī from kurub-ilī: they do not want the copper you sent me. they ask for scrap. my donkeys have been brought to the paddock. no small goods are available for me here. send me some (from) there. the donkeys ... i ... scrap ... rent for donkeys ... i shall pay up. i borrowed 2 minas of copper from lipit-anum and he has taken it out of the copper you sent. he has not given me anything of his own. if you are truly my lord, convert my textiles to a slave and as for the slave, as soon as he has been paid in full, send the servants.
seal of akuza son of šu-anum, seal of uraya son of manana, seal of aššur-bāni son of šalim-aššur. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
ilali-uman, the miller from tiwada, owes 1 mina 15 shekels of silver to ali-ahum. reckoned from the week of the -official.
say to šarra-suen, thus says aššur-rabi: your -textiles and and the rest of the oil are still available here. your representatives! have left to go there. here a decision by the colony is in force that nobody shall sell anything at all to the anatolian. ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur is on his way to you with 21 shekels of silver. please my brother, send me a message telling me yes or no. i will not consume a single shekel of silver!""
to ali-ahum; seal of amur-šarrassa.
... ... ... ... ... ... cost ... ... shekels [of silver]; a ... ... cost 1 shekel; a / the ... ... cost 2 shekels; ... ... 4 shekels ... ... ... ... ... ... cost; [... ...] cost [x] shekels for ... ... ... ... [x shekels]; 15 grain for onions; 1 sheep cost 1 shekel. all this was consumed / paid during / from the .
3 minas of refined silver and its interest due from ikūn-pīya; 3 minas of silver and its interest due from ikūn-pīya, son of šu-ellil; 2 minas of silver and its interest due from lā-qēpum; 2 minas of silver and its interest due from saliya; 0.5 mina of silver and its interest due from suen-nādā's son; 35 shekels of silver and its interest due from ṣilli-ištar's son and his anatolian partner; 4.3333 minas of silver due from šu-bēlum, son of itūr-kēn; 14 shekels of silver due from aše'ed and his son, they will pay at the gathering (of the barley) on the threshing floor; 1 -textile due from innāya, he deposited it at the colonial office.
i gave x pirikannu-textiles and 1 robe from ... to aluwa and he brought it to purušhaddum.
the 1.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver that šāt-anna, the wife of uṣur-ša-aššur, gave to puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan for purchases, uzuwa has received the silver. if šāt-anna or šāt-anna's representative raise claim against puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan, then uzuwa son of libbiya will clear him. witnessed by nāb-suen, by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, by ilabrat-bāni.
to ennānum and ali-ahum from bēlum-bāni: šalim-aššur owes me 2 minas of silver. his terms have 2 weeks to run. also, for the 1 talent of good copper that you gave him there certify his tablet for a term of 2 weeks, let him give me my 1 talent of copper in wahšušana, and then when he arrives let his tablet be invalidated. my dear brothers, keep an eye on šalim-aššur there. if he has not come to me then seize his servant with us and let him deduct (the payment) for two weeks, and make him pay the 2 minas of silver and 1 talent of good copper and send me word. ... i am waiting for my instructions. i shall let him take a trip to purušhaddum.
thus ali-ahum, dadiya, <and> da..., say to elamma and kurub-ištar: 17 minas of silver šalim-aššur brought us, without its excise having been added. thereof we gave 0.6666 mina as excise (and) it became 3 shekels less due to purifying, (so that) the rest of your silver is 16 minas 10.3333 shekels. thereof: 126 -textiles cost 11.5 minas [3 shekels] [of silver] 4 donkeys cost 78 shekels (of silver), 7.5 shekels (of silver) for half a donkey, 54 shekels of silver the working capitals of 2 harnessers, including their clothing allowance. 20 minas of tin at a rate of 13 shekels per (1 shekel of silver) (cost) 92 shekels [of silver], 10[+x] shekels the harness of the donkeys, [x]+ 1 1 / 4 shekel additions, 2 shekels for ... 8 1 / 4 shekels the export tax. aššur-mūtappil is leading this to you.""
as to the 4 minas of silver that enna-suen owed to our father, 2.5 minas of silver, interest, 0.5 mina, expenses on the 5 minas of silver, i received from enna-suen. 1 mina of silver furthermore that ennam-adad owed i received at the same time from enna-suen. when i wrote to warad-ilī in kuburnat and ... when i wrote to katila(?) to amur-... and ... 4 shekels of silver ... x mina silver ... šad-ahšu ... 1 mina 5 shekels of silver owed by ...; 0.3333 mina of silver owed by ... x mina of silver ... i received from the man of tumliya; 1 mina of silver owed by ušhata's son; 2.5 mina of silver owed by ikūn-pīya son of ...; 1 talent of -copper owed by shorty"; also shorty gave me a slave-girl and left her with ah-šalim. i have not yet received šimašitiša. in all: 30 minas 3 shekels of silver apart from the copper i received from the oustanding claims of my father. 6 minas 15 shekels ... the previous ... 0.5 ... i paid to the office of the colony; 1.5 mina of refined silver under my seal, 1060 bronze pins, x shekels of silver under my seal, 15 minas of copper, 1 mina of sickles and 120 bronze pins, all this i entrusted under my seal to aššuriš-tikal and he brought it to ali-ahum. witnessed by ennam-aššur son of butkum, by ilī-dan son of iddin-aššur. 3 minas of silver i paid to ... and a tablet ... what they swore by the city ... among the tablets ... he placed it. of the silver that we sent to you transported by ... i gave 1 mina of silver to šu-ištar. you promised x mina of silver to the 3 servants of our father for working capitals, and our father took this silver. x shekels of silver furthermore for their small goods; 10.5 shekels of silver furthermore for their small goods; 10.5 shekels of silver for their clothes; i paid 0.3333 mina 3 shekels of silver to pilah-aššur; 10 shekels of silver for uṣur-ša-aššur son of akuwa; 10 shekels of silver and 0.6666 mina of good copper, 3 shekels for their small goods i gave him when adida went to the city. when abuwa lived here and i sent hudu-bēlī with him to the city, both here and on the journey ... 0.6666 minas of silver was spent. 7 minas of copper and 3 shekels of silver for his small goods, 3 shekels of silver ... i gave to aluwa. i paid 4.5 shekels of silver, the fees from the city when he returned. x minas of sickles, 3 shekels for his expenses ... for their small goods i gave to a... 10 shekels of silver was spent when ... 0.5 mina of silver ... small goods worth 3 shekels of silver i also gave ... witnessed by damiq-pī-aššur son of ... by šu-ištar, by lā-qēp son of šu-aššur. ...: inns; 1.5 shekel of silver for the official ... x mina of silver for ilī-kullī; 5 shekels of silver: inns; 1 shekel of silver for the official in kuššara i gave to him as well. small goods worth 1.5 shekel of silver šalim-aššur ... i paid x mina of silver for donkeys and for ... when amur-aššur sent my mother to our father in durhumit, i gave 10 shekels for his wages ... when i gave šāt-anna to the husband, i gave 10 shekels for his wages ... when i gave šāt-anna to the husband, x mina silver, rings worth 0.83333 mina 5 shekels ... for 5 ; thereof i received 3 for 11 shekels a piece from šumma-libbi-aššur. 15 shekels of silver: 3 ; 7.5 shekels for an undergarment; 0.5 mina of silver either for sacrifices or for expenses. when i crossed overland to timelkiya for the goods: 0.3333 mina of silver for small goods; 10 shekels of silver for inns; 5 shekels of silver: inns in šalahšua; 5 shekels of silver: inns in hurama; 6 shekels of silver for the official in hurama; he shamed me(?) for 0.5 shekel of silver. when i sent ali-ahum to luhuzaddiya, 6 shekels of silver for inns, ... for his small goods, 10 + x shekels of silver for ... 8 donkeys, either išuah's son ... 0.6666 mina of silver ... i sent to tegarama ... of my father two ... aššur-lamassī from the house of ...-aššur ... šumma-libbi-aššur ... them."
to aššur-ṭāb, thus says kuliya: in accordance with your instruction we, i myself, aššur-mālik, son of kurara, and šu-bēlum, son of puqidi, have settled the affair of anah-ilī, son of ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur, for 1 mina of silver and i myself guaranteed 1 mina of silver in anah-ilī's name. you gave me a tablet with your seal stating that you would not come back on anah-ilī for the 1.3333 mina of silver of his debt-note. should anah-ilī not recieve from me the tablet with your seal, then i will send to the city, to your father abu-šalim, 1 mina of silver and as soon as he recieves that silver abu-šalim will give to my and anah-ilī's reprisentatives a tablet with his seal stating that he will not come back on anah-ilī for the 1.3333 mina of silver recorded in his validated tablet. and then i will give you back the tablet with your seal and this letter will be cancelled.
to aššur-malik from kurub-ištar: our father has taken a lot of silver on my account here. my dear brother, take care to send me the silver in your possession as well as what you may ask for from brother and friend with an express transport. the goods ... send ... to aššur-taklāku and a... in purušhaddum and let them sell it at whatever price and let the silver be available for me. (place) 20 textiles on my account in the office of the colony, so i shall not balance 1 or 2 minas of silver instead of the silver at the accounting, and i shall not be unhappy. our father paid at 7 shekels of silver on each (mina) for kura's investments. there is no silver.
thus elamma and kurub-ištar, say to dada and ēnah-ilī: the 30 minas of silver that ah-šalim brought to your father, if there is tin available at a rate of 15 shekels (to 1), then buy it and send it to me. if the rate is less than 15 shekels (to 1) then buy for one half of it tin and for the other half textiles and ship them to me with the first opportunity. it should reach me here before the suspension of traffic. when you seal the tin and the textiles write on the packets (with tin) and on the hem of the textiles: "belonging to ". no word of you should be heard outside! the silver belongs to elamma.""
i myself paid 0.6666 mina 7.5 shekels of refined silver, my earnings, to iddin-aššur son of dan-aššur; i personally spent 1 talent 40 minas (of copper) both when iddin-aššur led us to the court case and when they e the tablet with witnesses in the gate of the god, and ṣilliya gave me half of that. i personally paid x 0.5 minas of good copper, the and the decision (?) of the attorney. i too paid for the food of the attorney. ṣilliya did not give anything for his food. when i and ababa travelled to ilī-dan we were delayed on the journey until this very day, and we dropped his case; then we returned from kuburnat to durhumit - 0.5 mina 4 shekels of silver was the expense. all this i have paid in order to conclude the matter of our father's house. i shall take my expenses from the silver of my father's house.
ababa, the attorney of šalim-aššur, seized us against ennam-aššur son šalim-aššur and ṣilliya, his brother ali-ahum's representative, and the attorney ababa said to ennam-aššur and ṣilliya, ali-ahum's representative: 22 talents of good copper are in your possession." ennam-aššur and ṣilliya, his brother ali-ahum's representative, answered: "yes, it is in our possession. in kanesh i and my brother will make a settlement and wherever copper is shown as being owed by us, we shall deposit it for you." the durhumit colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, by šukkutum, by ennam-suen."
from iddin-aššur to hanunu, ali-ahum and ennanātum: ennam-adad owes worth 2 minas of refined silver at the market price in the city to a merchant. i personally have his certified tablet. when the merchant ... his tablet ... 15 shekels ... the city ... let him deduct ... of the interest. make him no favours on the interest. make him pay and send it with the very first transport. take care to have him pay. the tablet concerning his debt to the eponyms, concerning 30 minas, is in ennanātum's possession. place it among my tablets and then send me word.
from man-mahir, dan-aššur, ali-ahum and šu-ištar to ennam-aššur: why are you lying around there where there is no father and no mother, making the disease worse? instead of going down to the temple here, asking mercy from the god, praying constantly to your god so that brother and friend could give you encouragement, you have sat there for a year as an empty man, without purpose or wishes. your father's investors here offer those things to your brother which you earlier constantly asked me for, but, in fact, since your brother is alone he is of course unwilling to agree on your behalf. urgent, set out and come here the very day you hear our letter! also, strangers may carry you away all the time. agree to some 10 shekels of silver either for donkeys or for a pole and set out and come. clear up the affairs of your father's house here. no evildoer should harm you. until now your accusers have been pestering you with lawsuits.
from ilī-dan to ennam-aššur: my dear brother and lord, ... you came ... let (the tablets) be invalid. as long as the tablets have not been invalidated at all, i shall by no means show you any favours and i shall not make any payments in silver to you.
... he carried out his wishes. later the colony dispatched damiq-pī-aššur as envoy and he rejected the wishes of the colony and accepted itūr-ilī's wishes; also, the letter that itūr-ilī sent to the king of tawniya, damiq-pī-aššur, as the envoy of the colony, read it aloud, so, dear brothers and lords, take counsel there and act because the city and my father's house have been turned into debtors. i take responsibility. i shall have the man extradited. since he did not acquire my brother's blood-money, and since he bothered (me) with the silver of my father's house for two years and my brother surely was killed because of his iron, (therefore) assist my sister and my brother's daughter there, appeal to the city assembly and acquire a capable attorney. i take reponsibility.
thus išme-aššur, say to ennum-aššur, aššuriš-tikal, ... ... ...num, and ennānum, and in particular to aššuriš-tikal: 0.3333 mina of silver, [which] here buṣu'a? for half of it ... ... ... ... when i was about to start my journey he has ... ... ... me and he drew up a record with you as guarantor. and you said: 'after your departure ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... give me a -textile then i will take responsibility for the silver and the interest on it ? you can reach me.' you are staying there until this very day. and i, i trusted you, but until this very day he did not send me a -textile with a friend or colleague, nor did he sell it over there and ? the silver to zûlu. and you, until this very day you have kept silent! aššur and the god(s) of our father may witness ... ... ... ... ... ... give ... ... ... ...""
seal of ilī-rē'ī, son of ataya, seal of šu-labān, son of ibni-ilī, seal of puzur-abeh, son of aššur-šamšī,
to [... and ...] say, thus [...] pūšu-kēn, [...], and aššur-r[ēṣī?]: the interest on the 51 minas of silver we borrowed for you at a merchant's house amounted to 4 minas and 15 shekels of silver. total: 55 minas 15 shekels, including its interest. abu-šalim has brought 46.5 minas of silver, it became 12 shekels less by / than the 18 shekels we deducted for dirtiness, so that 46 minas of silver became available. you wrote us as follows: 'elamma has a debt of 4 minas of silver'. he retained in his possession 3 minas of silver that you owe (him and) therefore he paid 1 mina of silver. in your instruction you write: 'let karwāya pay 4 minas of silver' - he paid 3 minas; 1 mina iddin-abum paid. aššuriš-tikal refused to pay 1 mina of silver. since your own silver is 4 minas 15 shekels short, we entered (a money-lender's) house (to borrow it) and your 4 minas 15 shekels, together with the interest on it have now become 5 minas 10.5 shekels of silver reckoning from the week eponymy of amurrum-bāni and aššur-nādā in month xii. therefore? our tablet of [51 min]as of silver plus interest on it tablet. send the 5 minas 10.5 shekels of silver plus interest on it, so that our tablet can be can[celled?...] [...] please, our fathers and brothers, take care to send the silver and let the silver not get much and let them not retain our tablet!""
x+1 minas of refined silver hitani, son of ili-nada, owes to kuliya, son of ali-abum. 1.5 shekel of silver per mina he will add as interest ...
seal of šu-nūnu son of amur-ištar, seal of zuzu son of ennam-ilī, seal of amurrum-bāni son of šu-ilabrat. amurrum-bāni owes 8 shekels of silver to irišum. he will pay at the gathering of the threshing floor. if he has not paid he will pay interest at the rate 0.3333 shekel per month. eponymy after that of amur-aššur son of karriya.
ennam-aššur gave 5 shekels of silver and 1 sack of barley to mula, aššur-massuʾī's maid. ennam-aššur said: you have received the silver and the grain. until your husband arrives you are not to touch his house and his slave-girls. if you have touched his house and his slave-girls, your mother and your brother must return the 5 shekels of silver and the sack of barley." her mother and her brothers said: "we shall return it to you." witnessed by aššur-nādā, by aššur-iddin, by tarhuala, by šiliuman."
seal of the -payers, of kuliya, the messenger of kanesh, and of durhumit, to every single and the, until kanesh.
to aššur-muttabbil and aššur-malik; to aššur-malik from šakiškinu: x mina less ½ shekel of silver ... of amur-šamaš has been sold. the rest of the silver, 0.3333 mina 4 ½ shekels is owed by you. my dear brother, give the silver and the purchases to aššur-muttabbil. i too am capable of doing you favours.
seal of man-mahir, dan-aššur son of puzur-aššur, ali-ahum his brother and šu-ištar son of šukkutum; to ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur.
to zukuwa from puzur-aššur: i am well. i stay in durhumit. he took 1 on my account in hurama. the fees from hurama to durhumit amounted to 0.5 mina 2 shekels per donkey-load. my dear brother, i am alone. i have no one to feed the donkey or realise the outstanding claims. send me 2 servants whom you know well, so one can feed the donkeys and one can assist me and ... a textile you yourselves ... should produce so i can enter purušhaddum before the cold. winter should not catch up with me. here fodder for the donkeys is hard to get. take care to send me servants and the cold should not catch up with me. let me go on a trip. the very day you hear my letter - since i am alone, send the servants!
in durhumit, when our father died, ali-ahum opened the strong-room sealed by our father, and witnessed by 3 affiliated traders he took out both silver, good copper, poor copper, lapis lazuli, textiles, and certified tablets concerning customers, and he gave it to annina son of aššur-bel-awātim, and later the tablets (were) in annina's house. witnessed by sakliya son of napraka, by puzur-aššur son of šikti-hašut, by ilī-bāni son of amur-ištar.
seal of šumi-abiya, son of zuzū,seal of labān-nādā, son of iddin-suen, seal of aššur-ṭāb, son of ennamānum. 1 talent of tin with seals of the city, aššur-ṭāb owes to ahu-waqar.when ilšu-rabi, the servant of aššur-ṭab, returns fromthe city, immediately when (he receives) the tin, 5 talents of refined copper of good quality, in pieces, ahu-waqar will pay to aššur-ṭāb (and) ahu-waqar will get his 1 talent of tin.
to la[massutum] se[al of ... ... ... ... ... ...] ... ... ... ... the duplicates
adida and ali-ahum questioned aššuriš-takil as follows: šalim-aššur invested 3.3333 minas of gold in your joint-stock capital, and he wrote an amount of 10 minas of silver for your joint-stock capital. šalim-aššur is indebted to the eponym in the city, and the tablet of the investment šalim-aššur made to you, that very tablet is in the eponym's possession, so pay the silver and the accrued profit, let it go to the eponym and then he can give the tablet concerning your capital to your representatives. three years ago you came from burušhaddum and you have given the silver and the accrued profit to one or two of my partners. but i and those who signed as my father's guarantors come to you time and again, but you refuse to give the silver and its accrued profit. on top of this you have caused him to have expenses of one or two minas. the interest on the silver of the eponym must not increase and my father's house and the investments my father made for you must not be lost. give me the agreed amount in silver, let me send it to the eponym's office, and then i shall confirm you for the profit of the silver together with my partners. also, in accordance with the verdict of the city šalim-aššur's silver from your capital will go to the office of the eponym. do not obstruct me! give me the silver and do not bring an extra expense of 1 or 2 minas on me." witnessed statement."
from the kanesh colony to the trading station kuburnat: here the sons of šalim-aššur confronted us and said: aššuriš--tikal son of aššur-rē'ī owes silver to our father, and he has spoken harshly to the man. we take responsibility for his forced transfer." extradite the man there together with šēp-ištar, our messenger, and you must be the executive arm for our messenger."
from man-mahir, šukkutum and ikūn-pīya to ali-ahum: of the 24 that hanu brought, hanu has taken one for his clothes (and) he has also taken one (to pay) for his food. the rest of your textiles, 22 pieces, were sold for 4.83333 shekels each. their value in silver was 1.6666 mina 6.6666 shekels. thereof puzur-abeh has taken 5 shekels of silver, entrance tax for the tin, in wahšušana; we paid 0.5 mina 4.5 shekels of silver to the maid. ilī-ašrannī led it to you. we gave 4 minas for his expenses. hanu brings you the rest of you silver, 1 mina 6 shekels of silver under our seals.
i paid 6 shekels of silver in the name of adida.
i gave 2 shekels of silver when mannum-balum-aššur married his wife.
15 shekels of refined -silver walhišna, peruwa and tuwatuwi, his wife, owe to lamassutum. reckoned from the week of innāya not later than the festival of parka they will pay. if they do not pay they will add interest at a rate of 1.5 shekel. month xii, eponymy of aššur-imittī. they are jointly liable for the silver. should they not pay when their term is due, then i will take away tuwatuwi. in the presence of šarnigāšu, and of ennam-aššur.
half a mina of refined silver amur-aššur owes to iddin-abum. one ? for fattening he will deliver. before kusilānum, before aššur-lamassī. he (also) owes two colored woolen fleeces.""
from alulaya and amur-ištar to ennam-aššur: you have sent us a missive. since many men were noted down, we have not let anyone hear the missive, but we confronted him and said: ... is in your possession and let your missive go to the man." he refused to ... the missive. we then said: "the missive ... witnessed by... our final missive shall go to ennam-aššur." 16.83333 minas of lapis lazuli, 20 talents 50 minas of washed copper and 30 talents of bad copper - all this he confirmed with alulaya and arši-ah as witnesses. concerning this amur-ištar keeps the silver in accordance with your instructions. we said: "who among your investors ...?" the very day you hear our letter ... your head in this way and come... ennam-aššur should come and with..."
say to šu-ištar, thus zuba, mataga..., and šamaš-bāni: as for the wool about which you wrote, when the men arrive here we will sell all the wool together and we will divide the silver and with ... ... we will send it to pūšu-kēn. as for calling at a merchant's house (for a loan), as you have promised, i have here now come to an agreement with ir'am-aššur and he said: 'let his instruction come to ikūn-pī-aššur and to me, then i will give it to you'. ... ... ... since i ? you ... ... ... ... ... do me a favor ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... [... ... wool?] of mamma ... ... ... ... ... ... ... the wool ... ... ... ... ... for the rest of ... ... ... ... ... ... send to me.""
for 8 minas of refined silver idi-bāni shall confirm for me ilī-ālum and mīšur-rabi('s liability), (that) i and idi-bāni are each (entitled [to) half the amount. moreover, he shall give me a valid record of his stating that he owes 8 minas of silver. should he fail to confirm them and also to give me his valid record, (then) idi-bāni shall sue puzur-aššur for my computed share, for 4 minas of silver. in the presence of šu-el<lil>, of šuk(k)utum, of amur-ištar, and of šu-bēlum.
ennam-aššur son of amuraya owes 2 minas 16.1666 shekels of refined silver to aššur-nīšu son of ilī-ellitī. witnessed by kuliya son of ali-abum, by urad-aššur son of watrum, by aššur-malik son of samaya.
šuppun-ahšu, the lady's servant, came and in the name of the lady i paid 2 minas of silver to the chief of the staircase.
šu-bēlum received 28 kutānu-textiles and 1 black donkey. if the goods do not become the property of the woman and šu-bēlum, he must pay the proceeds from their sale in silver to šalim-assur. of this, šu-bēlum has paid 42 shekels of silver, either smuggler's goods or balance payments. goods that puzur-aššur son of išār-kitt-aššur brought up here. witnessed by kuziziya, by ennam-aššur son of babaya.
1 mina and 3.5 shekels of refined silver, is the working capital of aššur-imittī; he is held by the silver. if he does not arrive in the city and does not pack together with me, then from the week of iliš-tikal and šu-anum he will add an interest of 1.5 shekel per mina per month. in the presence of lā-qēpum, of aššur-mālik. the tablet in the city concerning his working capital is invalid.
to mannum-kī-aššur and anna-anna from ennam-aššur: akali, aššur-malik's slave is bringing you under my seal 1 tablet from the gate of the god concerning 9.5 minas 3 shekels of silver, with the testimony of alulaya and lā-qēp, plus 1 tablet concerning 5 talents of copper from kura's debt. let them remain there with anna-anna. there ewarimuša should take care of the outstanding claims of the man from tumliya.
also, remind ṣilulu there that his missive as well as your missive ... to the men who are his partners as well as his representatives ... a verdict of the city here ... we have taken their tablet. pay attention and leave your instructions.
... ... purified, apart from 2 minas of the . thereof, in accordance with your instruction, 4 minas 10 shekels of temple funds for ataya <and> rabi-aššur; 2 minas 8.5 shekels for hinnāya and ataya; 0.5 mina for aššur-ṭāb; 41 shekels for ataya; 0.3333 mina for i-da-suen; 0.3333 mina for aššur-bāni - all this under my seals rabi-aššur is bringing. for 2 donkeys we paid 23 shekels, 12 shekels of silver for the official and the guarding ... ... ... ... ... ... ...enna]m?-aššur... ... ... thereof 26 shekels of silver ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... -copper rabi-aššur.
memoranda concerning customers.
to dan-aššur and ušmaya from puzur-aššur: as you brought tin to akiya, i have brought it here before akiya, and there is 2 minas too little of the tin. ṭāb-ṣill-aššur brings it to you sealed by akiya for testing. check? it there with the weight-stone that you weigh with and if there is too little, add bags on top of it. further, he brings you 2 minas of sickles. let him take 8 minas ... you yourselves should take 20 minas and give it for the paddock of my donkeys. i promised to give 0.3333 mina of silver as a working capital to akiya. i do not have it here. i shall return my silver from the city. ṭāb-ṣill-aššur brings you 15 shekels of silver. 5 shekels of silver is owed by akiya. give him the silver and write his tablet for 0.3333 mina of silver. ṭāb-ṣill-aššur brings you 4 shekels of silver. when she asks you for it, give it to her. in accordance with what i wrote you, give good, extra-fine textiles to šalim-bēli.
from enna-suen to aššur-muttabbil and aššur-damiq:
seal of aššur-šamšī, son of šu-ištar, seal of aššur-lamassī, seal of dān-aššur, son of kususārum. [x] mina of refined silver aššur-lamassī owes to lamassutum. from the week of kurub-ištar and iliš-tikal he will pay in 4 months. if he does not pay, he will add interest in accordance with the regulation of the colony.
... with his testimony ... abuwa brings that to you. the very same day he arrives you must send him to the city. he shall conduct the case concerning my tablet. do not deny him 10 shekels of silver for his expenses - give it to him. i paid 15 minas of copper to have the witnesses brought here and led to the gate of the god. 3 minas of copper, the fee for abuwa for the stretch from kanesh to wahšušana, i paid. i gave 2.5 minas of copper for his expenses. in all i have paid 20.5 minas of copper for him. 2.5 minas of copper is owed by dannaya's wife in wašhaniya. ... my dear brother, ... the tin i left for you ... x shekels of silver, the sureties, ...
azu owes 0.5 mina of silver to ali-ahum. 5 sacks of barley, 5 sacks of wheat, 2 sheep and 20 loaves of bread are the interest on the silver; the silver itself he will bring by harvest. witnessed by galgaliya, by šarakšuna.
seal of bēliya son of ilī-kurub, seal of šalim-aššur son of adad-damiq, seal of ali-ahum son of šu-kūbum, seal of ṭāb-pī-aššur son of ali-ahum, seal of šamaš-abī son of sūsānum. as to the 2 talents of washed copper that ṭāb-pī-aššur gave to luzi on behalf of šamaš-abī, and for which ṭāb-pī-aššur certified a tablet for luzi: ṭāb-pī-aššur said: if your representatives have received the copper in kanesh (from) šamaš-abī, you must pay 2 minas of silver for every talent of washed copper." ṭāb-pī-aššur and šamaš-abī have been satisfied. any tablet concerning 2 minas of silver from the contract of luzi that may appear will be invalid."
to uṣurānum and ennam-aššur from ištar-rabiʾat; specifically to ennam-aššur: in accordance with your message which you sent with aluwa i asked you for one or two months, but you did not listen to me. i have borrowed some 2 minas of silver in a merchant-house and the silver was sealed with aluwa's seal with an affiliated trader as witness, and it is in my own house. my dear son, the tablet concerning ṣill-adad's debt as well as one or two other tablets, and the tablet concerning bēlum-bāni are available - entrust those tablets there with uṣurānum as witness to puzurkunu and aluwa so they may bring them.
to itūr-ilī and ali-ahum from enna-suen: i hear that ennam-aššur is dead. he owes me 17 talents of copper of good quality. to ali-ahum: i left you my tablets, a container under my seal, with šu-bēlum son of kuziziya and šu-ištar son of šukkutum as witnesses. i said: if any of the customers sends either silver or copper, receive it and take out my tablets and ..." ... act so that my silver is not lost."
i have invested 2 minas of gold in amur-šamaš; i have invested 1 mina of gold in ali-ahum son of sikuhum; i have invested 1 mina of gold in azuza;1 mina of gold for amur-aššur son of šu-ištar; 2 minas of gold for ilī-kurub son of ilī-liddi; i gave 8 textiles and 9 minas of tin 8 years ago to puzur-suen as an investment loan;i gave 1 talent of tin and its wrapping to amur-aššur son of iddin-ilum as an investment loan; i gave 2 minas of silver to ištar-pilah son of anninum before he went down to the the city as an investment loan;0.3333 mina of gold owed by ennam-aššur son of ṣilli-ištar; 15 shekels of šikkum owed by kuziziya;3 minas of ... owed by ennam-aššur son of ...; reckoned from the week of ...-bani ... he will pay the silver ... ...
ikūn-pīya owes 2.6666 minas 5 shekels of refined silver to ennam-aššur; also, after the price in silver of his 2 minas 2 + x shekels of tin has been deducted ikūn-pīya will leave x talents of tin for ennam-aššur. when the tin is sold, ennam-aššur will receive its value in silver. also, 1 -container of silver for 1 mina 7 shekels; further, ikūn-pīya will leave for ennam-aššur worth 9 shekels of ... witnessed by kurub-aššur, by biltum son of ali-ahum, by marihšu. further, i balanced for 1 mina of refined silver because of ikūn-pīya with innaya son of amuraya. when i shall leave on my journey ...
thus šuli, say to saktāya please, my brother, my friend, i do not look at the others there, i only look at you! you must bind him contractually for every shekel of silver you donated to him and as for ziki and šu-kūbum, they must not stay overnight one single day, send them (here). send me 6 shekels of silver and make 0.3333 shekel of it available so that she / you can buy ?. give 1 / 6 shekel for combs and put it under seal and do not send? šu-kūbum here empty-handed, let him bring it to me. send me silver, do not disappoint me, send it to me!""
these words he spoke before the colony. the colony passed a verdict, to the effect that until they acquire the blood-money for šalim-aššur's son, no one may forgive the colleague from tawniya, and no one, either among the great men or among the small men may carry out his wishes. if anyone knows the verdict of the colony and yet remits my brother's blood-money or indeed carries out his wishes, then make it known in a tablet of the city, namely that he has remitted the blood-money and again has carried out his wishes. the tablet of the city should come to the plenary assembly, and they must make a statement before aššur's dagger, whether it is one from the great men or from the small men. if his representatives have approached the city there, saying: ali-ahum has remitted the blood-money for his borther before the colony" - (know that) i have not in any way remitted the blood-money. the colony supports him. he shall take the colony as witness. if he has witnesses among the great men against me, then what can i say? i and he should clear our affair there with our tablets and our witnesses before the city assembly."
from aššur-šamšī and dādaya to ali-ahum: in accordance with your instructions we seized šu-illil with respect to the silver and its interest, and he said: i have not been able to acquire the silver. (will it be acceptable) if i pay 3 minas of silver today, and you then set a term for me for the rest of your silver?" so, as to the silver, to bind it to his ... a reliable affiliated trader guaranteed 3 minas of silver for us. if you have agreed with us ... in accordance with our letter, we shall receive the silver, but if you do not agree with us in our decision, then he will not have guaranteed the silver for us. you must make up your mind there. also, as for your favours to šu-illil son of mannum-kī-aššur he said: "i shall take 1 mina of silver, and furthermore his brother ennam-aššur owes 1 mina of silver to my father. i shall take that out of the silver.""
seven boxes with tablets i left behind to our šu-bēlum. one tablet for 2 talents and 40 minas of black copper, a second tablet for 15 minas of refined copper, being the debt of ennam-suen, one tablet for 23 minas of refined copper being the debt of aššur-ṣulūlī and didiya. all this i left behind to šu-bēlum. in the presence of išuhum, son of ...mum, and of asānum, son of šu-bēlum.
say to ir'am-aššur, thus ennam-aššur: i sent you earlier 2 minas 57 shekels of silver from hattum with šu-suen to kanesh and you brought that silver to the city and i thought: 'he is my father, he will go and [bring up] from the city tin, 10 minas, so that i can seal and send at least some silver [on top of that (owed) according to my tablet'. but you have bought no tin for me, with the argument: 'your sister needed the silver, so i gave it to your sister [on the basis of you tablet] and ... [1 mina 14] shekels of silver, its excise added, its transport fee paid, and separately [0.5 mina of silver], its excise added, its [transport fee paid, temple funds of aššur, i gave you under my seals in hurama, with azutaya and idi-bāni as witnesses. i said: 'please by father, my boss, buy for me tin and send it to me', but you have not sent me anything! as for the textiles you entrusted to me in luhusaddiya - there was trouble on the roads and the textiles stayed in the villages until the situation was cleared. six months ago i asked from you in hurama (to pay) my expenses. you said: 'i will go and [send you] from hahhum a few minas of tin. but you have not sent me anything! ... ... luhusaddiya ... ...""
to aššur-massu'ī and lamassī from ennam-aššur: concerning our father's testament i have written to you (fem. sing.) five times but no answer ever left for me, and you do not inform me or encourage me. as for me, apart from you, what sister and lady do i have? from the day our father died, may aššur and our father's god be my witnesses - have i not exerted myself to the utmost night and day? i said to myself: ... i shall clear my sister, clean her house and lighten up her darkened face." but as for you, you never sent me word and never encouraged me. on the day you hear my letter aššur-massu'ī and you should have a copy made of our father's testament and send it with aluwa. kudātum brought you 0.5 mina of silver; aluwa brings you 0.5 mina of silver and furthermore 2 shekels for your daughter. my dear lady, plague my representatives night and day, and, as i wrote to you, get 2 tablets with verdicts of the city, send ašdu and aluwa and write me about all the remaining that is not of our father's house, and inform me. our father's investors have just sealed the house. "
1 1 / 4 shekel of silver is owed by lulu.
mannum-balum-aššur seized us against ilī-uṣrannī, and mannum-balum-aššur said to ilī-uṣrannī: confirm or deny that you owe me 2 minas 10 shekels of silver! i have a certified tablet." ilī-uṣrannī answered: "yes, i owe you 2 minas 10 shekels of silver. i contest my seal. my tablet has been altered." mannum-balum-aššur said to ilī-uṣrannī: "surely, when i formally appointed you as witness for aššūr-idī, did you or did you not assist him (appearing) before the station? deny or confirm that to me!" ilī-uṣrannī said: "and if i did assist, will you then sue me for the testimony? if you do (want to) sue me for the testimony, then go and appeal to the station!" mannum-balum-aššur said: "remember what was sworn by an oath by the city, that he has argued in anger and that he refuses to answer me!" the station at wašhaniya gave us for these proceedings and we gave a tablet with our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by rēmānum son of šu... by aššur-imittī son of ṣilli-ištar."
karšini and alili owe 6 shekels of silver plus 20 loaves of bread to ištar-lamassī. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī, month ša-sarrātim, eponymy aššur-imittī, they will bring 3 shekels of silver, its interest, plus the bread within one year. witnessed by waldi-ilum, by inah.
... for his extradition. let him extradite the man there withour messenger šēp-ištar. and you must be the executive arm for our messenger.
... šalim-aššur gave him the silver for purchases. witnessed by enna-suen son of ikuwaya, by salliya son of iddin-aššur, by damiq-pī-aššur, by aššur-nādā son of ennam-aššur.
iddin-abum owes 5 minas of refined silver to aššur-šamši. reckoned from the week of amur-ištar he must pay in 23 weeks. if he has not paid before the completion of his term, he must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. witnessed by amur-ištar, by la-qēp.
say to ir'am-aššur, thus ennam-aššur: when in hurama you wrote for me a document concerning the textiles, apart from the 2 1 / 4 shekels of silver that you had given me, i told you: 'give me cash the travel expenses', but you answered me: 'only when you salvage the textiles i will go and send you from hahhum 0.5, 1 or 2 minas (of silver) for your expenses'. then i wrote a few times to you in hahhum, but you did not send me anything. did you not know that when you had left the roads were in turmoil and the palaces were headstrong? until the matter was cleared i had to stay 8 months in the interior. i went to where the textiles were, in the villages, and i got the textiles out and with great effort i brought the textiles into wahšušana to your representatives. three textiles were spent for expenses. the textiles are affected by moth and in bad condition. we repeatedly offered them for sale, but there were no buyers. did pilah-ištar not tell you there that moths have spoiled them and that one offers a bad price for them? ten textiles have now been sold for 2.5 [minas of silver. your representatives sealed the silver and it is here. while you instructed me in hurama as follows: 'if your sister goes to the city, give the silver, the price the textiles yielded, to her and let her come here', since a severe cold reigns here [it is not feasible for her to go and therefore i did not yield the sil[ver to her. it is up to you there what to do. i sent [you 2 minas 57 shekels of silver with šu-suen from hattum, thinking: 'he is my father, he will go and bring tin up for me from the city so that i obtain at least some silver and also [can pay silver to my creditor and send (what i owe) on the basis of my tablet.' but you, you said: 'your sister needed silver and i have given it to her on the [basis of your tablet'. later, when you were about to set out on [a journey, you said: 'give me every single shekel of silver you have then i will buy for you tin, 10 minas, so [that you can obtain silver and gather courage'. but instead of encouraging me, (for) the 1 mina 14 shekels of silver - its [excise added, its transport fee paid - and in addition 0.5 mina of silver, temple funds of aššur - its excise added, its [transport fee paid - that i gave you in the presence of azutaya and idi-bāni to make purchases with, until this very [day you have not sent me the tin bought [with my silver! i thought: 'you are my father, my boss, purchase for me tin, 10 minas, and send it me'. please, my father, my boss, send what was bought with the silver i gave you, its tin. enable me to face aššur!""
ennam-aššur seized us against aššur-ṭāb, and ennam-aššur said to aššur-ṭāb: for what do you question me and detain me? if either my father owes you anything, or if i owe you anything, or if you have in your possession a tablet certified by me, then bring forth your witnesses and let me satisfy you with these men as witnesses!" aššur-ṭāb answered: "you owe me 1 talent of silver. i take responsibility for holding you." ennam-aššur said: "do keep in mind what was sworn by the city and the king - that he detains me although i do not owe him anything!" the hurama colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by aššur-ennam son of lā-qēp, by ša-ištar son of aššur-immittī, (grand)son of etaya."
two textiles of the wife
karšini owes 15.3333 shekels 15 grains of silver to ali-ahum. reckoned from the week of the -official, month bēlat-ekallim, in the eponymy after that of aššur-imittī, he will pay at the earliest convenience. witnessed by waldi-ilum, by inar. karšini and alili owe 6 shekels of silver to ištar-lamassī. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī, month ša-sarrātim, in the eponymy after that of aššur-imittī, they will bring 3 shekels of silver, its interest, plus 20 loaves of bread within one year. witnessed by waldi-ilum, by inar.
... the death of my father has ennam-aššur ... the representatives of their (fem.) fathers did not ... that they did encourage the men. as for you (plur.), you did not write either about my father's death or send me your greetings to encourage me. while i here with the merchant ... as much as for you ... he has ...
damiq-pī-aššur son of warad-ilīšu will pay 1 mina of silver to ištar-lamassī and ali-ahum when he comes up from the city. witnessed by adida, by aššur-bāni, by bēlum-bāni.
from itūr-ilī to ennam-aššur: send word to wahšušana that they should take control of the proceeds from my 30 textiles and send it to you. they should take control of the proceeds from 1 abarnian textile belonging to alu...num's son and send it to you. also, they should take control of the proceeds from the textiles belonging to ali-ahum and ennānum and send it to you.
as to the goods belonging to šalim-aššur that was in hahhum in issu-arik's house, and which iddin-abum's sons seized and entrusted in the house of aššur-bēl-awātim in kanesh - in accordance with the tablet with a verdict of the city that kakuwa brought enna-suen and anuli must not raise claims to those goods against šalim-aššur.
šalim-aššur's attorney questioned man-mahir. the attorney said: according to a verdict of the city the lapis lazuli of šalim-aššur that was deposited in the city - whether investors of šalim-aššur have seized it or have taken it to cover the debts of šalim-aššur's sons, they must return both silver and lapis lazuli. he who does not return it will have it taken away by force. when šalim-aššur was alive he gave you lapis lazuli for purchases. either give me the lapis lazuli or give me the price in silver of the lapis lazuli, so i may bring it to the city. do not create difficulties for me, the attorney! i shall indeed remember what was sworn by an oath by the city and the king - that he has obstructed me. he refused to give either the lapis lazuli or the price of the lapis." this is not a formal court case, only a witnessed statement. witnessed by šu-ištar son of erradi, by ugi... son of ennam-aššur."
ennam-aššur son of šu-illil received 1 mina of refined silver belonging to ennam-aššur son of karriya. if ennam-aššur son of karriya raises claim against aššur-ṭāb, ennam-aššur son of šu-illil will clear him. in the week of puzur-ištar son of šu-ilabrat, month hubur, eponymy ali-ahum, he received the silver.
to amur-šamaš, aššur-ṭāb and lā-qēp from ennam-aššur: 22 talents of wool under my seal, 94 fleeces, 10 black donkeys and their harness - all this šalim-wardī and šēp-ištar lead to you. lock the wool and the hides in the store room there and send me the servants. open the upper storey sealed by me, and seal in the -container 0.5 mina of checked silver and 1 mina of good copper; also, aššur-ṭāb should give you for sale 1 -textile of extra-fine quality which he promised me for my clothing, and then give it together with the silver to the servants so they may bring it. they should not rest a single night. also, as to the -implements, guard them. seal the house with your own seals.
of the 5 talents 15 minas of wool that šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī brought to the villages -thereof 1 talent 1.3333 mina of good copper, 32.5 minas of bad copper and 45 minas ...
to nini and ilabrat-bāni; seal of kunila. urgent! pay attention to the words of the letter.
to lulu and ennam-aššur; specifically to lulu from ... i gave you x minas of refined silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, with tūram-ilī and šu-ištar as witnesses, for purchases when you went to the city. my dear brother, if you have brought up tin or textiles, give them to ennam-aššur, seal them and send them to me. further, you received 6 shekels of silver from ennam-aššur. ... of this silver ... before ... send it to me.
seal of amur-šamaš, son of mīšar-rabi, seal of lā-qēpum, son of ellil-bāni, seal of elamma, son of iddin-suen, about the debt of elamma son of iddin-suen. 1 mina 6 shekels of refined silver elamma owes to imdī-ilum. month ix, epoynmy of iddin-aššur, son of kubīdi. elamma said: 'your 1 mina 6 shekels of silver amur-ištar has collected'. [elamma] shall confirm amur-ištar (as having it) to imdī-ilum [and if] he does not confirm that amur-ištar has it, [elamma] will pay [the silver] and its interest to imdī-ilum.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, ennānum, inah-ilī and ennam-aššur: my dear brothers and lords, unfortunately i have suffered great losses. the silver you sent me with šu-nūnu lā-qēpum left for ... and šu-nūnu seized his ... and he will give in with respect to the silver in a lawsuit and balance the silver. i have experienced great losses. my dear brothers, withdraw at my accounting in the office of the colony and do not deposit anything on my account.
0.5 shekel of silver for bread. 2 pairs of women's shoes, 20 bronze pins, 10.5 shekels of tin, five sets of leather straps, duglu worth 1 / 4 shekel - when i sent aluwa to kuburnat to ilī-dan, adida and salliya i gave this to him to dispose over.
to kuziziya and pilah-ištar from ennam-aššur: šalim-wardī and šēp-ištar brought 2 thin textiles and 33 shekels of lapis lazuli to kuziziya. šu-bēlum and aluwa bring 3 good waterproof textiles and 1 garment under my seal to kuziziya. but why is it that although i wrote to you about pilah-ištar, my servants have stayed until today? pay heed to my instructions and let him give you the silver, send the silver under your seals with the very first transport and with my servants, and let it pass overland in his name. they can pay the silver here; i shall (then) give his tablet to his representatives. to kuziziya: my dear father, the proceeds from the 2 thin textiles...
seal of šu-kūbum, son of qa'atum, seal of ali-ahum, son of aššur-mālik, seal of kunnāya, son of manana. for expenses and losses of the caravan of ilī-ālum, whatsoever, kunnāya shall not raise claim against elamma. as for the 30 minas of tin, for which kunnāya served ilī-ālum's caravan a notice, it will belong to him together with (the other members of) the caravan according to its declared value.
to ali-ahum and zukuwa from puzur-aššur; i gave 13 minas of tin under my seal in zalpa to ennam-aššur son of narām-suen. if ennam-aššur has entered (the town), let him give you the tin and sell the tin for silver - or else he may give you silver. buy for the silver proceeds from the tin and let them stay put until my instructions arrive.
12 shekels of silver became the interest on 8 minas of silver.
seal of puzur-aššur; to anu...
to aššur-... from amu...: give either 2 or 3 jars of salt to the porters. give either 15 shekels of copper and two jars as their wages, or 2 litres of salt, so they may bring it. 0.5 mina of scrap ... copper ... pledge illil-bāni ...
[...]-ālim [...b]ēlānum [... sea]l of atata [...sheke]ls of 'dust silver' [...], son of aššur-šamšī, [owes to the creditor. from] month vi he will pay in [x months]. if he does not pay [he will add] interest [in accordance with the rule of the] . the bearer of the tablet is the creditor. eponymy of aššur-imittī, [son of iddin-ištar]. seal of ennum-aššur, son of aba..., [seal of ...], son of amur-ištar, seal of abiaya [son of uzua. 0.3333] mina 5 shekels of 'dust [ silver' the capital of] kuliya, son of ali-abum, [abiaya, son of uzua], has in possession, he is held by the silver. if he goes away to somewhere else, i will hire [a hireling and he will compensate the wages of the hireling].
20 minas of silver sealed by šuzuzu we entrusted to iliya's sons in accordance with his instructions.
... ennam-aššur i paid to them; 1.5 mina of tin i gave in the hands of your servant, 10 shekels of tin in the hands of šu-suen. your tin was 2 minas too little; 0.5? mina for (paying) the import-tax on the tin purchased by iddin-suen, we placed on top of the packet. the rest of the tin is 53 minas and 47 shekels, of tin under our seal. of the 25 dark textiles they took 2.5 textiles as import-tax and they balanced 1 shekel of silver [... textiles as] wrapping, [... x+]2 tiles ...
x shekels of silver plus 1 black textile.
puzur-... gave 8 minas of refined silver to iddin-abum. he will book 2 minas of gold in the name of a merchant in the city. witnessed by lā-qēpum, by lā-qēp s. of illil-bāni.
aššur-ṭāb led us into puzur-iliya's house and entrusted 26.3333 minas 8 shekels of silver under his seal to ilī-nādā son of aššur-nādā. aššur-tāb said: bring the silver to ennānum son of amriya." the wahšušana colony in plenary session gave us as witnesses to these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by puzur-aššur son of šu-laban, by kudātum son of amur-ištar; ibni-adad son of buzuliya was our absent partner."
... and from what you receive from my outstanding claims ... send ennam-aššur ... one of the guides ... of my harnessors that you observe, keep him and let him serve you, and have my outstanding claims paid. my dear brothers, take care to have paid at least 10 minas of my outstanding claims in kanesh and do me a favour. i am staying in a city where purchases can be made. as to the matter of ennam-bēlum, if an investor as safe as you yourselves will take responsibility for you, then sell the tin and textiles in accordance with his tablet and write a tablet. if an investor does not answer you, then take 15.5 minas 3 shekels of silver. but, if it not so, then hold on to x minas of silver and noone must ... until i come up. ...
to bēlum-bāni and ali-ahum from zukuwa: 2 extra ingots and 2 bundles of tin under my seal, in all 35 minas of tin, that aššur-bāni son of iddin-abum brings; 2 bundles under my seal, in all 33 minas of tin, that amur-aššur son of aššur-ṭāb brings; in all 1 talent 8 minas of tin from the votive offerings amur-aššur, ...-rabi and ... bring. my dear brothers, take care to unpack the tin the very day it arrives, check it and send me word about the check of my tin so i shall not worry all the time. give them their wages, 12.5 shekels of silver. let my tin stay in one of your houses. as for ali-ahum and the servants who are present - plus the donkeys that ilī-wēdāku conducted to me plus my own that wašibru-bāni led to you, including its harness - let ali-ahum lead that to me.
... we shall see the tablet ... silver ... his pledges ... he brought to you (fem.) ... ... they hold ...
sealed by šalim aššur; to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum. a kettle of 20 minas ...
thus bēl[ānum] and hinnāya, say to elamma: after you had left your son sent 11 minas of silver and the 16 minas of silver, on which you had given ennam-aššur instructions concerning gold, to ennam-aššur. ennam-aššur took these 16 minas of silver and sent 2 minas of gold and the 11 minas of silver to us. later the son of ṣallāmum produced 18 minas of silver. this silver and the earlier amount of gold he ... we collected everything and brought (it) into ka[nesh] to your representatives (saying): 'at the instruction of pilah-ištar you must entrust the gold to the son of ṣallāmum to bring it to elamma'.""
4 talents 42 minas of copper with iddin-aurum. 0.5 mina of silver, working capital of kitaya. 8 minas of silver with šuli, son of puzur-abeh. 4 minas 3.83333 shekels of silver with idnāya, month iv, eponymy of šudāya; he will add 1 1 / 4 shekel per (mina per month) as interest. 1 talent 20 minas of copper and 25 shekels <of silver(?)> with ibaya. 8 shekels of silver with ikūn-mīšar. 2 minas 10 shekels of silver with aššur-dūrī, year eponymy of iphurum. he will add 1.5 shekel per (mina per month). 0.5 mina of silver with balṭu'um. 25 shekels (of silver) working capital of galdaya. 1 mina of silver with galdaya.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, ennānum, inah-ilī, man-mahir, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: check my certified tablets concerning my outstanding claims, and make anyone who owes me a single shekel of silver pay the silver and its interest. you yourselves must decide there in whatever matter you observe. take care to have the silver paid and send it to me as soon as possible. the silver from my outstanding claims must be available; do not make trouble (mixing it) with my merchandise. 7 ½ minas of silver, the share of the man from tumliya; you received interest for 4 years at 2 minas of silver each and two times 80 (sacks) of grain, half of it wheat. 8 minas of silver plus 320 sacks of grain – make the proceeds from my grain and my interest on the silver available and send it. and if they will give you the full payment on my share, then take it. also, if any of my partners do not agree with you, then sell the share. send me all of the silver. 1 mina of silver and 40 sacks of grain, the interest for 2 years, i charged to you before my departure – with šuppun-ahšu son of ušhata, and you received 80 sacks and 2 pots as interest for 4 years. so,offer this grain for sale and deposit the price with the silver of the man from tumliya. 20 sacks of beer-bread, 20 sacks of malt minus the price of ... and 600 sacks from that of the man of tumliya - the lady received the interest when i was staying in burušhaddum. she gave me 6 minas of silver thereof and said: i shall send you the rest later." don't you know how much silver amur-šamaš has taken there on the account of his son irišum? and the lady is robbing even me, but you, you keep quiet! concerning 37 minas 10 shekels of silver, 2 minas 3 shekels of gold and x thousand minas of copper i left my tablets and ṣdocuments with ennam-aššur in burušhaddum. as for the losses of ali-ahum's son i heard about x+5 shekels which they imposed and he returned. of all this ennam-aššur has not sent me any silver. there, let him send ... that he took. i shall not reach ... i do not reach, and i shall not be unhappy. to ...: i expect to see your care and gentlemanly behaviour. ... may these men know."
to luzina, adida and ali-ahum; from enna-suen: puzur-aššur son of azuza owes me 5.3333 minas of refined silver. he is to pay within 7 months from the month narmak-aššur in the eponymy of enna-suen. if he has not paid (in time), he is to add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. my dear brothers and lords, the man has cheated me once or twice. seize him and have him pay the silver and as much interest as you can manage and then buy tin for me, seal it and give it to a reliable affiliated trader who can bring it to me under your seals.
seal of alulāya, son of aliya, seal of aššur-pilah, son of šu-anum. amur-ištar and ennam-aššur seized us and we passed for them the following verdict: amur-ištar will swear by the -emblem of aššur that ennam-aššur did not show him the contract of the working capital [of his father in the presence of bēlānum and maṣi-ilī, son of buzuzum, and then, when he swears, ennam-aššur will give amur-ištar a tablet with his seal stating that the daughter of elamma and the sons of elamma will not raise claims against amur-ištar. month i, eponymy of the successor of ennamānum. the above mentioned men were judges.
say to kurub-ištar and the merchant, thus iddin-aššur: 50 -textiles (and) 2 donkeys belonging to the trader ēnah-ilī entrusted to me (for transport). consider what to do with your merchandise. send me en route 0.3333 mina of silver.
aššur-ṭāb, šu-ištar and i myself, we will discuss in tawiniya; the week eponymy of aššur-bāni. reckoned from the the week eponymy of elalī and aššuriš-tikal within 6 [weeks / months ...]
from ...-aššur to ... and ali-ahum: my dear brothers, ... either in ... or in ... are sealed with your seal, and go both of you to me and to ... in kuššara; also, with respect to at least 10 minas of silver that my investors have imposed on me, as well as the fact that the city convicted me to a fine of 1 mina of silver(?) - come here so i can inform you and we can decide what to do and act! my dear brothers, to whom can i turn and to whom can you, for it is your property that i owe - it is indeed yours! come and encourage me ... they had enter. if (it is) for expenses, then give them 0.83333 mina; if that is not the case ...
to tibula, tanušta and aštahšušar from šukkutum: why is it that when the man goes to the colony there you release him? he listened to lies. does he not hear all the time that they maltreat my brother and my partner here? for that reason i am delayed here. to tibula: if the maid there is hungry or not properly clothed, then give her some silver out of the silver that the merchant left with you. indeed, you ... to reach the colony. if you are truly my mother, listen to no one! my trip has been put off.
i deposited 25 textiles when the king went to hanaknak.
from ennam-aššur to kura: my journey goes to the city. as to the 3 talents 35 minas of copper from your second, upper tablet, your term is exceeded by 2 years. when my servant returns from purušhaddum pay his washed copper to ah-šalim or to my representatives, and get your tablet from ah-šalim. if you do not acquire enough copper, then pay 1 talent of good copper and set down in an open memorandum that it will be deducted from your debt. then we have settled the majority of the copper from your tablet until my return. give 1 mina of copper to my servant to dispose of.
the 2 minas of silver that you left behind to us we paid to the merchant; it was 1 shekel short. 40.5 shekels i paid to ennāniya, 10 shekels, thereof ṣilulu took. 0.5 mina of silver, the price of a slave-girl is due by the priest. a second (slave-girl) i left to ennāniya. 36 minas of copper (and) 5 shekels of silver due from zuba, 1 young slave - all this i left to ennāniya.
to kudātum; seal of nāb-suen and ennam-aššur.
3 shekels of silver belonging to bēlum-bāni; 3 shekels of silver belonging to lamassī; 0.3333 shekel silver for šēp-ištar, the price of drinks; 0.3333 shekel the price of a piglet. all this from the price of oil. ali-ahum.
seal of abela; to ilī-bāni and kililsum.
... ennam-aššur ... they gave ... of the tablet ...
sealed by nimar-ištar son of puzur-aššur, by ennam-aššur son of karriya; aššur-nādā son of šu-illil is our (absent) partner. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
... minas of silver ... puzur-aššur ... minas of silver ṣill-ištar owes; he will pay within 1 year reckoned from the week of uraya and kurub-ištar. if he has not paid at the completion of his term, he will add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. month ša-kēnātim, eponymy ali-ṭāb son of sassātum. witnessed by puzur-ištar son of aššur-malik, by ennam-aššur son of utaya. šum-abiya owes 0.5 mina of refined silver to ennam-aššur; he is being held in service with this silver. witnessed by atadiya son of ennānum, by aššur-nīšu son of amuraya. šum-abiya owes x + 5 shekels of refined silver; he will pay when he comes up from the city. if he has not paid, he will add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. month bēlat-ekallim, eponymy after ilšu-rabi. witnessed by atadiya, by annali. ... mina of refined silver owed by ... son of dudiki. puzur-aššur owes ...; they will pay within x weeks reckoned from the week of aššur-malik and šamaš-bāni. if they have not paid, they will add interest at the rate ... per month per mina. month qarraʾātum, eponymy after ...
to šu-tammuzi, elaya, aššur-massu'ī, adida and ennam-aššur from ennam-aššur: my dear fathers and lords, take care there with the two tablets from the city that i wrote to you about, and confront the city concerning what i wrote to you, get tablets with verdicts of the city and send aluwa and the attorney. my dear lords, do not act rashly there, lest i be delayed here a long time, and my father's house be lost. i shall come and see your eyes. aluwa brings you the belts, your shipment, under my seal. the very day your attorney arrives, i shall clear myself within a month and come to see your eyes. why should i write at length to you? act so as to save my father's house.
say to elamma, thus aššur-mūtappil: as for the 3 talents of tin and the textiles you gave me with the instruction: 'you and ahu-waqar must take (each) 1 talent of tin' - since the traffic is cut off, i brought it to burušhattum, to aššur-ṭāb, and i gave aššur-ṭāb the 3 talents of tin. the textiles he brought back to wahšušana. he shipped to you 35.5 talents of copper under aššur-ṭāb's and my responsibility.""
... let him swear that they have not achieved an extra, and then we shall give the silver, as much as ... of the textiles, and with respect to what aššur-imittī makes in the city. šu-tammuzi and adida must ... among my witnesses ...
thus iddin-suen to kuliya: the one mina of oil of tuhpiya and the 5 minas of copper of local origin you must not leave behind for me when you leave! please, my brother, take care not to leave the oil and the copper behind for me!
iddin-abum owes 20 minas of refined silver to šu-illil. reckoned from the week of the kaššum he must pay within 13 weeks. if he has not paid at the completion of his term, he must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. witnessed by puzur-aššur, by aššur-imitti, by šu-anum, by aššur-bēl-awātim.
seal of aššur-imittī, seal of šu-anum, seal of iddin-abum. concerning 14 minas of refined silver that iddin-abum owes to amur-ištar. reckoned from the week of dalaš and duhniš he must pay within 43 weeks. if he has not paid within the stipulated term he must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. of this silver 5.6666 minas 5 shekels belong to aššur-emūqi. he will await the coming .
to amurrum-bāni, ṣilulu, kuziziya and aššur-dan from šalim-aššur; specifically to kuziziya: two or three times i sent word to the city, saying about the textiles that pilah-ištar's representatives and adad-rabi son of buzi have been buying in the city - i said: "the textiles that are deposited in haraba, remove them personally." but you, you left my textiles for me. you did not pledge yourself for even 1 or 2 minas of silver, in fact, until the day the attorney books my textiles. wald-ilum brought you 3 minas of silver, the price of a mule together with the man from tumliya. and together with the silver, as much as they will bring you from tumliya, i have a claim on itūr-ilī of 1 mina 10 shekels of silver; receive it from him or say it to his representatives so they can pay it to you. galgaliya, alu son of adudu and haršunuman, the priest of the sun-god, (owe me) 5 minas of silver; their term has expired and they are jointly responsible for the silver. further, 20 sacks of grain [...] owed by galgaliya; 5 sacks owed by the priest of the sun-god. 3 talents of good copper owed by kukuwa, his term is overdue; he pays interest at the rate 1.5 minas per month per talent. 2 minas of silver owed by kim-aššur. 16.5 shekels of gold for night quarters(?) is available. 0.6666 mina owed by amurrum-bāni. 0.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver, the price of wheat, owed by happu-ašu. 4 shekels of gold owed by ilī-mīšar. 4 sacks owed by liwiru and the same ... the silver as much as they bring from tumliya, ..... he has been paid 12.5 shekels of silver, his wages and the deficit on the copper. to kuziziya: take care to produce my outstanding claims before i come. my journey is imminent."
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: concerning waliya, aššur-bēl-šaduʾe's packer, i and puzur-aššur wrote a missive to you from hurama, and in our missive it was stated for you that the silver is my silver and before i was cleared i have caused puzur-aššur to be satisfied with the deficit on the silver. also, puzur-aššur has written a missive to enna-suen and you. he has paid the various expenses on the journey. my dear brother, take care and have the silver paid. if you have already had the silver paid, then send word to me wherever i may be staying and inform me. with respect to the for your dres that you wrote about, he does not bring you a .
from ... to ali-ahum: in accordance with your instructions we seized šu-illil, and of the 3 minas of silver that šu-illil, ilī-dan's harnessor, received, i deducted 1 mina of silver for ... at the order of his guarantor, and of the 1 mina of silver, the rest of the silver, i deducted 18.3333 shekels of silver for your tablet stating that he owed it to me, we produced your certified tablet and puzur-suen brings it to you. the rest of your silver, 1.6666 mina 1.3333 shekel ... within ...
to ilī-mutabbil and aluwa from ennam-aššur; specifically to ilī-mutabbil: in the week of itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar, month allanātum, i and lā-qēp son of šu-aššur settled accounts in the house of the official, and i set down 12.5 minas 7 shekels of refined silver as owed by lā-qēp; and with respect to the silver it was you i designated for him, so when he arrives from purušhaddum he will pay the silver to you as my representative. and then you have written, sating: i have written his tablet." my dear brother and friend, apart from you do i have any older brother? here i have repeatedly demanded the silver from lā-qēp but he would not pay. he said: "let them bring my tablet, and then take your silver!" urgent, urgent, the very day he arrives there, copy the tablets of lā-qēp's debt with 3 affiliated traders as witnesses; then give the copy to them while you yourself keep the other copy. wrap the tablet and entrust it to aluwa and an affiliated trader so they bring it. let it pass overland in lā-qēp's name. my dear brother, take care!"
41 minas 11.5 shekels of refined silver, sealed by your representatives and by me - 3 packages; further, 0.6666 mina 1 shekel of silver, its transport tariff - all this i entrusted to šu-nūnu and ilī-ašrannī, and they brought it to šalim-aššur in the city. furthermore, 5 shekels of silver i gave them for their food. witnessed by ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar, by baziya son of ilī-kurub, by the son of qardaya. furthermore, i gave 10 shekels of silver to šu-nūnu as a working capital and 7 shekels of silver to ilī-ašrannī witnessed by them.
i owe 10 shekels of silver to aššur-lamaša son of lā-qēp.
from elāli to ennam-aššur: ali-ahum has written to his representatives, saying: hire an attorney in the city for me and let me question him (ennam-aššur) on the basis of our instructions in accordance with the tablet about how much our father set down as debts from me and my brother, and then have him extradited." clear yourself before the attorney arrives and seizes you for a statement, set out and come. send me the proceeds from my textiles that i gave to your father. la-qēp brings you 1 akkadian textile."
25 minas of good copper owed by ikūn-pīya son of ikūn-pīya.
sealed by puzur-ti'amtum, by aššur-imittī son of ataya, by uṣur-ša-aššur son of aššur-malik, by adada son of adad-rabi, by aššur-ṭāb son of sadaya. concerning the fact that uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb owe 4 minas of refined silver to šalim-aššur. reckoned from the week of mannu-kī-aššur and ikūnum they must pay within 6 weeks. if they have not paid (in time) they will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. they are jointly responsible for the silver.
2.5 shekels of silver for two belts from talhat;
i entrusted 4 minas 13 shekels of refined silver under my seal to dan-aššur son of puzur-aššur and he sent it to the city to šalim-aššur.
aššur-šamšī and ennam-suen seized us and ennam-suen said to aššur-šamšī: give me the silver that accrues to me". aššur-šamšī answered: "i will / can not give you the silver, for i have ... ... you ... ... for ... ... ". ennam-suen said: "why is it me that you are... ... ... ... ... ... me? do it to your sons!" aššur-šamšī answered: "i will personally take your expenses for my account". in the presence of zuba (and) of puzur-adad; ali-abum, son of zia was our colleague. for these words the kanesh colony made us available and this tablet (with) our testimony we presented before aššur's dagger."
to šalim-aššur; sealed by man-mahir.
... ... ... is bringing to the house. we are well and the youngsters are well. with your scarfs, which you left behind, and those which samas-bani [left behind], su-anum is on his way to the house. [there are] many persons and also many donkeys ... ... ... i have given him.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: 1 mina of silver, 5 minas of sickles, bronze pins worth 5 shekels of silvers with the first transport - also, rings - give that to a reliable affiliated trader so he may bring it. ...-amurrum should come. ... to you ... to an affiliated trader ... the matter ... have him come with the first transport. ... aššur-imittī owes me 12 shekels of silver amur-ištar ... amur-ištar ... the matter ... make him pay the silver, seal it and send it to me. my dear brother, a final report should come to me and ...with the caravan. produce the tablet concerning 4 shekels of silver and send it to me. my dear brother, apart from you i have no elder brother. pay attention to the words of the tablet.
representing the sons of šalim-aššur anupiya seized us against galgaliya and haršumnuman, and they heard a tablet concerning 10 minas of silver, their debt. anupiya said: does the tablet not bear your seals?" galgaliya answered: "they are my sealings. however, haršumnuman is the one who paid the silver." anupiya said: "we are inheritors. produce evidence for this, that you have either paid the silver to šalim-aššur or have paid to the sons of šalim-aššur." haršumnuman said: "i personally satisfied šalim-aššur with the silver of our tablet. i am willing to go to the river for you." the kanesh colony gave us (as witnesses)for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by kuraya son of ulaya, by ennam-aššur son of hurāṣī."
to aršiahšu and peruwa say, thus kassu-bēlī: please, my brothers my lords, 30.3333 shekels of silver and 15 minas of purified copper under my seals bēlum-bāni is bringing you. buy for me cleaned wool, do not try to save even half a shekel of silver! i will pray for you before aššur, send him quickly, it is winter time.""
the colony has rendered a verdict, stating that whatever silver šalim-aššur has paid for iddin-abum, ...
ennam-aššur questioned ali-ahum. ennam-aššur said to ali-ahum: we are inheritors. why is it that our father's customers detain us? come on, let us plead with our father's customers and satisfy our father's customers. do not cheat me lest they detain us. five or ten times we have arranged meetings with brothers and friends, but you keep refusing. do not cheat me. since you will not listen to what brother and friend say, then come on, let us go to the 4 investors who represent our father, let them set us straight and let us please our father's customers - and then let us go to the city to our sister, the priestessand let us clear ourselves in accordance with our father's will that is in the city. do not obstruct me. also, do not let me incur an expense of a single shekel of silver." this is not a formal lawsuit, it is a witnessed statement."
to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: eništārum brought 10 minas of tin under my seal to you. aluwa brought you 1 fine textile. my dear brothers, send me the proceeds in silver from the tin and my textiles and thus do me a favour. take a decision concerning the merchant's goods. hear the missives the very day uṣur-ša-ištar arrives, and without a single day's delay send with him one of your servants, whom you trust like yourselves, and write me whether it is so or not, and only then send word to the merchant. the merchant is relying on me. take care, do not act rashly.
to hanunu and ennam-aššur from man-mahir: enter the interior of the house there, and place the tablet (that) ennam-aššur carries concerning the working-capital of daraš among my other tablets. also, look at the memorandum stating that he paid for ennam-aššur's various expenses, and make it known to me in your missive. also, ennam-aššur should keep the memorandum.
to enna-suen from ištar-iamassī: you implored me in order to return hudu-bēlī ... also, your brother ...
ennam-aššur questioned ali-ahum, saying to ali-ahum: now here i have shown you the missive sealed by you in front of 3 (witnesses), and you have confirmed it to me and we have entrusted it to them. now, may these men hear it - in fact, contest or confirm that it is our memoranda sealed by me and by you, stating that i and you have settled accounts and cleared the affair. do not obstruct me." ali-ahum answered ennam-aššur, saying: "the memoranda are sealed by you and by me. come on, let us seize 3 persons and let us settle in accordance with the memoranda that are sealed by us. further, our father left a tablet behind about how much silver he set down as owed by me and you, and our father's investors kept the tablet and they have placed it before the plenary assembly of the colony, and the colony has entrusted the tablet to the attorney. come on, let us pay even today as much silver as we are booked for on the tablet, let us seal it in accordance with the verdict of the city and go to the city. let us not obstruct the tablet of the city and the attorney." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by enna-suen, by šar-adad, by ilī-bāni."
10.5 shekels of silver, 200 bundles of reeds from haši-uman ...
the additions amounted to 7 1 / 4 shekels of silver per talent.
sealed by lā-qēp son of illil-bāni, by akuza son of šu-anum. the tablet from the gate of the god from before aššur's dagger, with our testimony.
to the merchant from adaya and aššur-ṭāb: adaya brought 4 minas of silver, its import duty added and under your seal. aššur-ṭāb brought 5 minas of silver, its import duty added and under your seal. in all: 9 minas of silver. specification: aššur-ṭāb brings you 1 talent 54 minas of sealed tin; at the rate 14.1666 to 1 its price in silver was 8 minas of silver. 1 donkey and its harness cost 0.3333 mina of silver. 4.5 shekels: export tax; aššur-ṭāb received additions of 2 shekels of silver. 4.5 minas of expense-tin, at the rate 14.1666 to 1 its price in silver was 19 shekels. your silver has been spent for you.
seal of aššur-emūqi, seal of ennam-aššur, seal of iddin-abum. concerning iddin-abum's debt. ... he will pay refined silver before šu-illil arrives. if he has not paid, he will pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per mina per month. concerning aššur-malik.
from šalim-ištar to aššur-nādā and ennam-aššur; specifically to ennam-aššur: dādaya and ladiya brought 20 minas of silver under your seal. thereof 50 ... 4 black textiles cost ... silver; ... tin at the rate 16:1 cost 9.83333 minas of silver; 1 mina ... 7 shekels of silver ...
ikūn-piya son of šu-anum has received 8 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by iddin-kūbum, by uzub-iškum his brother, by enna-suen.
to adida and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: i left 6 sacks with textiles under my seal in the store-room. among those (were) 12 textiles of good quality, 8 second quality textiles, 4 textiles belonging to ušmaya. place my textiles where they will be under guard. i left the price of a textile, 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver (and) 21 minas 10 shekels of with you. sell my copper for silver, then seal the proceeds in silver from my textiles and let it remain. do not consider the silver for your own needs, let it remain (intact). my dear brothers, as to the silver for my textiles, they should be sold for cash on delivery. i shall not have any outstanding claims. šalim-bēlī son of bašu owes me 14 shekels of silver. in ...
to šalim-aššur from adad-rabi: here šu-ištar, aššur-malik and šalim-aššur heard your letter, and they said: this matter is correct as he wrote in the letter he sent: issu-arik declared (such) in our presence." šu-ištar raised the matter, and they said: "let šu-ištar have his case, so we led him to the gate of the god, and we gave you a tablet." concerning the matter of ibaya's son, and in order not to raise questions to the colony about your witnesses, we went in to the king, and the king said: "let the litigant come and do not confront (the assembly). when ibaya's son arrives and they confront the city assembly, at that time demand terms. rebuff (the matter) with respect to your witnesses and turn (them) back to the city assembly so as not to ask questions of the colony, and then say: "the man will extradite the owner of the joint-stock capital. he will question the colony about his witnesses' - then the city assembly will give you (the right to a case)." 156 textiles cost 12 minas 18 shekels of silver; 6 black donkeys cost 55 shekels of silver; 30.3333 minas of expense tin cost 2.3333 minas of silver; to the 3 harnessors 25 shekels each as their working-capital, plus 6 shekels of silver for their clothes; 2.5 minas 4 shekels of gold was sold at the rate 1:6.3333 - the total of your silver: 24 minas plus 1 mina of gold. both transport tariff and donkey harness was 10 minas; he brings 9 minas 4.3333 shekels to you, and pilah-ištar this ..."
say to asq[udum? and] abila thus iddin-suen: give from aššur-idī's copper 1 talent of refined copper to ennam-suen. please, my brothers, take care to make aššur-idī pay the copper and write me also his reaction. he must also pay 5 talents of copper of šu-ištar. he has come to an agreement with the man without an instruction of mine. assist ennam-suen and ? to support him and to provide him with food"."
ilī-bāni son of yaya swore by aššur's dagger and ennam-ilī son of kuzari heard his statement. aššur-rabi son of mannum-šumšu swore by aššur's dagger and aššur-dan son of zu'u, the lieutenant, heard his statement.
6 minas of refined silver, 6 shekels his transport-fee, belonging to elamma i entrusted to puzur-anna, the son of aššur-dān. in the presence of aššur-nādā, son of aššur-idī, and of zuba. (it is) the price of your tin to the amount of 1 talent. 5 minas of gold, its excise added extra and its transport-fee <paid>, belonging to zuba, puzur-anna brought away for making purchases. it will travel overland in both directions at their expense, (for) it is money of their trust. in the presence of aššur-nādā, son of aššur-idī, and of asqūdum.
... silver for anna-ilī and 1 shekel of silver for his sacrifices i gave to aššūr-malik son of ilī-malkī.
from ikūn-pīya to ennam-aššur, adad-pilah and šu-hubur; specifically to šu-hubur: i owe 8 shekels of silver to your father. you have received 10 shekels of silver for alitum. your father must not make any claim on my house, my wife or my slave. indeed, it is you who will seize my silver. to my representative: the missive from your father concerning ikūn-pīya - have the silver paid... if it is not... the silver... if he has shown you the missive then certify his tablet. if he has received silver in the city or if (for some other reason) i am not indebted to him for 10 shekels of silver, then as much as... he received... he must pay (back) to me. urgent, show him no favours.
from iliya to šu-ištar and urmeša: specifically to šu-ištar: the day you hear the letter you must inspect the slave-girls. also, if anyone owes anything to her, assist her, make the payment for her and then do come here. you have not left me any of your iron.
sealed by ennānum son of ali-abum, by agiya son of puzur-aššur; adad-rabi son of buzi was our (absent) partner. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave a tablet with our testimony before aššur's dagger.
from amur-ištar and ilī-bāni to itūr-ilī and the merchant for the goods transported by lā-qēp: a top-pack of 6 in addition to a donkey ... and its wrapping šumma-libbi-aššur leads to you. give the carriage costs there if ememe asks you for it.
seal of šumi-abia, son of abaraya, seal of ennānum, son of šu-hubur, seal of puzur-ištar, son of aššur-taklāku. 3.6666? shekels of refined silver aššur-ṭāb paid to puzur-ištar in the name of ir'am-aššur. puzur-ištar will not come back for anything, whatsoever, on ir'am-aššūr. from the week of kurub-ištar, month iii of the eponymy of the successor of ennam-suen
15 minas of silver the excise on it extra, his transport fee paid, i gave to ēnah-ilī. 2 minas of silver for storing barley i gave him. 0.5 mina of silver (from) her free loan, 2 shekels of silver a shipment for ummī-išhara. 13.5 shekels of silver, his free loan for bēlānum. 2 shekels a gift for puzur?-ilabrat. all this silver, the excise on it extra, his transport-fee paid ēnah-ilī has brought away.
to elamma say, thus lā-qēpum and šu-aššur: 72 -textiles belonging to you, 26 belonging to the, 1 of your, 1 of atāya - in all 100 shipped under aššur-mūtappil; 71 shipped under uṣāriya's son; 31 shipped under aššur-lamassī; separately 3 shipped earlier; 1 of hatiya - in all 226 -textiles. thereof 181 and 25 akkadian textiles zikur-adad led to you. i paid 3 7 / 12 shekels for small wares, 1 takuštaean textile and 2 dark textiles (sent) earlier lamassutum(?) took. 2 talents of tin provided sealed in the city belonging to the ..., 3 talents belonging to you, 2 packets of artama - we checked them and they proved to contain 5 minas too little. we opened one packet and we balanced [x + 0.5] mina 4 shekels to the son of dadānum and the son of uṣāriya after the tin for expenses and the 0.6666 mina of silver we had sent them en route had been spent. one packet they detained in the colonial office because of the import-tax. the scribe booked you for the additional packets, but the affair has not yet been settled. six packets with either our own seal or that of the city, 36 - and 32 dark textiles, including those for wrapping, 6 black donkeys aššur-imittī and huziya are leading towards you. 1 mina of tin (taken) from a packet (and) 2 3 / 4 shekels of silver for small wares we gave to aššur-imittī and huziya. 10 and 8 dark textiles we deposited on your account. from these packets 2 are shipped under the responsibility of aššur-lamassī.""
thus say aššur-šad-ilī and ababaya, say to kuliya: as for your tablet which šu-suen, son of innāya, has in his possession, when here their affair was concluded by (decision of) the man who settled his case they would release your tablet to us and then we would release the tablet of the city of / concerning aššur-rēṣī. when we kept asking šu-suen for the tablet he said: i will give it you, but the man has left without us knowing it! if over there he asks you for silver, do not give it. tell him: by decision of the man who settled the affair you have been ordered to hand over in the city the tablet you have." and we here ... will ask [the man] who settled the affair and ... after abu-šalim [] we had obtained ... from / with puzur-[...], send us that. send [aš]šur-ṣululī here, send (also) ... oil."
40 minas of refined copper the price of a donkey, due from aššur-ṭāb. the donkey of bēlānum he took when the lady had died for 15 minas of black copper.
15 shekels of silver, 1 white sheep owed by huršun-uman ...
send me word about how much grain you will give to the lady, so i can send it to you with the proceeds from the thin textiles.
2 minas for ... ... ... ...; 1 mina for šu-kubum, 1.5 mina for aputriya;
to pilah-ištar and amur-ištar; specifically to pilah-ištar from ennam-aššur: as to the one thin textile of good quality that i gave you to sell, my dear brother, sell the thin one acting as a true gentleman, seal the silver and send it with amur-ištar. but if the thin textile has not been sold and is still there, put down silver yourself as much as it will fetch when sold, seal it and let amur-ištar bring it. so let it be a favour to me - i am going to the city; i too am a man of favours. amur-ištar should not delay, send him. it is him i am waiting for.
as issu-arik will go to the city, he sold his houses by the well, where at present šalim-aššur is living, to tudhiliya the brother of tuli. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave a tablet with our testimony before the dagger of aššur. witnessed by sukkalliya son of amur-aššur, by akuza son of šu-anum, by uraya son of manana.
we entered šalim-aššur's house to settle the case, and šalim-aššur said: while they are going to lead me to burušhaddum in fetters in order to pay the debt of the slave abu-šalim, you on the other hand have taken 30 -textiles and a black donkey from the slave." šu-bēlum answered: "yes, i have taken what belongs to my slave abu-šalim." šalim-aššur impressed on us what was sworn by the city, and šalim-aššur said: "in case the slave does not raise claim against your slave, will he then raise claim against my slave?" šu-bēlum answered: "if he raises claim against yours, i shall guarantee for the textiles and the donkey." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by uraya, by ilī-dan, by mannum-balum-aššur."
sealed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by uraya his brother, by hadaya son of karawa, by anah-ilī son of hišar, by adada son of adad-rabi, by dakniš, by hurata, by puzur-ištar, by iddin-šamaš, the sons of dalaš. for the 9 minas of silver from harta's house and the 10 minas of silver from halkiaššu and karriya, sons of dalaš, they must not raise claims against šalim-aššur and his sons. i / he made him swear by aššur's dagger.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 mina [of silver ... ... ... ... ...] ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... let them take along(?) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... you have been ordered after my departure to forward [x] 0.5 shekels of silver to me in the city. if after my departure you do not forward it to me in the city you will pay me in the city 0.6666 mina per mina (extra). please, my brother, pay the silver to ea-bāštī and see to it that it catches up with me in the city. i could get angry with you, (for) the words you spoke are improper! pay the silver to ea-bāštī and let us stay brothers!""
uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb have paid 56 minas of silver from aššur-idī's silver to šalim-aššur, but 4 minas of silver remain (unpaid), and šalim-aššur wrote a debt note for uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb and released the (old) tablet concerning 1 talent of silver, the debt of aššur-idī son of sadaya to uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb. witnessed by aššur-imittī son of ataya, by adada son of adad-rabi; puzur-ti'amtum was our (absent) partner. the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony gave for these proceedings and we gave the tablet before aššur's dagger. adada seized aššur's dagger and isaya son of dagan-malkum heard his statement.
15 bags, half barley, half wheat, the interest of last year, is due from halga. 10 bags of barley when the snow disappears he will haul to me. 5 bags of wheat he will haul to me not later than the harvest. witnessed by lullu.
... he owes to you. ... a kutānu ... owed by ... in all: 18 talents ... outstanding claims ... 2.5 talents owed by ... talents owed by aššur- ... x talents 17 minas ... owed by iliš-tikal ... 0.5 talent 8 minas ... 10 talents ... purušhaddum ... 35 minas ... he will receive. ... 30 minas for ... for the office of the colony ... 1 mina of refined silver i sent to aššur-ṭāb son of amur-nahuš. 11 minas of copper for a sieve. 4.5 shekels of silver for amur-aššur son of iddin-ilum. 8 minas that i personally deposited in it. 2 minas for the rituals.1 talent 33 minas for ... uṣur-ša-aššur ... i paid ... copper owed by aššur-imittī. ... i have paid to the merchant. my dear brother, ... strong words that your mouth ... be evil(?). 1 talent of copper owed by ... the station seized aššur-imittī. ...
6 kutānus belonging to a merchant.
[] discussed. aššur-šamšī said: now then, let aššur-imittī assist you and [for whatever] the palace will take at your expense i myself will accept responsibility"."
30 minas of refined silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, under <my> seals, i entrusted to ennam-aššur, son of uṣāriya, in the presence of puzur-adad, son of ..., and of kurub-ištar. 7 shekels of [silver] i gave him for his expenses. 15 minas of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, under my seal, i entrusted to adad-pilah, son of anīnum, in the presence of šu-ištar, son of šukutum, and of aššur-mālik, son of šabahānum. 30 minas of refined silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, under my seal, i entrusted to aššur-rē'ī, son of iddin-ištar, in the presence of šu-kūbum, son of uzua, and of the son of kurub-ištar, son of [amurrum-bāni; 3 shekels of silver i gave for his expenses. 25 shekels of silver [his working capital?], 10 shekels for the road-tax of your servant ... 7 shekels of silver for šu-... he paid / provided to / for barānum. in all 42 shekels of silver, its excise added, for en[nam-aššur]. 10 shekels of silver, its excise added, for pilah-ištar, son of i[bisu'a]; 27 shekels of silver, the price [of 2 textiles of his] for dadiya; 27 [shekels of silver], the price of 2 textiles of his for en[nam-aššur]; 52 shekels of silver, the price [of 4 textiles of his for aššur-rēṣī; one bundle with 25 shekels of silver for aššur-kašid, šu-suen and aššur-idī i [added / sent]; 19 shekels of silver for aššur-rē'ī; 0.5 mina of silver of lamassutum ..., being temple property of [? ...]; 10 shekels of silver, consignment for ummī-išhara; [x silver?] for ilī-uṣ[ranni]; 4 shekels of silver of [...] for ummī-išhara; 1.6666 shekel of silver of lamassutum for [ummī-išhara; 1 shekel of silver for bēlulu; 1 shekel of [silver for nar'amtum; 1 shekel of silver for buṣū; 0.5 shekel of [silver for me-labrat. all this, under my seals, i entrusted to aššur-rē'ī and he brought it away to the city.
from aššur-bāni to ali-ahum and lulu: šar-suen son of puzur-suen brings you 3.5 minas of silver under my seal. my dear brothers, the day šar-suen arrives - i have taken a loan of 3.5 minas of silver from aššur-malik son of ali-ahum against interest; my tablet is certified - the day you hear the letter, pay the silver to aššur-malik, get out my tablet, split it and then let it remain with ali-ahum. my dear brothers, i have to add interest at the rate 1.3333 shekel per mina; i received it for 15 days in the week of iddin-abum. i received the silver cut off by way of the one-mina stone of ennānum. take care that he should not take interest from me. he is my brother. i can do him favours. if he takes interest as he can, i have 5 shekels of silver owed by lulu; give (the interest) to him out of that.
sealed by šalim-aššur; to iddin-abum and ennānum ...
from ennam-aššur to lā-qēpum and anna-anna; specifically to anna-anna: i have written you 10 times, saying: clear my outstanding claims so there will be no wrongdoing until i come. so, every shekel of silver should come my way." however, you, instead of writing and giving me information - no message from you ever comes. 1 mina 15 shekels of silver and its interest is the wages of happiahšu; 1 mina 10 shekels and its interest is owed by tarhišan; ... 0.5 mina 5 shekels ... plus 18 shekels, his interest, owed by alwa ... silver for their interest x sacks of barley ... apart from that of ušhata's son ... i have written repeatedly to my maid, that you should have the claims on my customers, both the silver and the grain paid. who does not pay, calculate for them 0.5 mina per mina and write me a report about how much silver you have received and inform me. to lā-qēp: i and you are indeed brothers. from the month allanātum - as to the silver you owe me, when you arrive from purušhaddum you will send it to me. if you delay this silver, i shall not be lenient towards you with the interest. 15.5 minas x shekels of silver, and further 0.5 mina 3 shekels ... is left. ... to my maid ... "
i owe x minas 5 1 / 4 shekels of silver to bēlum-bāni.
ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur has given 1 mina of refined silver as a working-capital to itūr-ilī and elāli, sons of puzur-anna. they will pay the correct amount of silver when they arrive from the city. they are jointly responsible for the silver, both in the city and abroad. month ša-sarrātim, eponymy after aššur-nādā son of ilī-binannī. witnessed by šu-bēlum son of šu-ištar, by zukuwa son of aššur-idī.
as for the 11 minas of silver for which aššur-šamšī and ennam-suen had themselves registered as guarantors of āl-ṭāb, should the silver be collected at the expense of aššur-šamšī, and ennam-suen, then āl-ṭāb's house in the city is a pledge for the silver. in the presence of zuba, of puzur-anna, of nabi-suen.
... within 10 months wherever they arrive ... month kanwarta, eponymy ...
0.3333 mina of silver for ... of puzur- ... nab-suen, 10 shekels of silver the price of pirikannu-textiles, 9 shekels of silver of ..., 7 shekels of silver of ..., in all 1 mina 1 ... shekels of silver. for this silver ... 10 shekels of gold ... assur-sululi ... 10 shekels of gold ... for the dinner. in all 20 shekels of gold and 0.5 mina of silver. all this, under my seal, puzur-istar, son of ennanum, from zalpa, brought to our bride in spe. in the presence of assur-emuqi, son of gazanum, the scribe.
seal of kuziziya; to ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur, and šu-bēlum.
to my principals, ali-ahum, aššur-rēṣī, dadiya and ennam-aššur, thus elamma: 16.6666 minas of refined silver, under my seals, its excise added, his transport fee paid, aššur-nādā is bringing to youplur. if, following my instruction that reached you, you have indeed borowed 30 minas of silver at interest and you have made purchases (with it) for me, then pay back the silver where you have borrowed it. if you have not (yet) borrowed it, then buy for me for the silver which aššur-nādā is bringing you and take care that they reach me before the suspension of traffic.
the attorney of šalim-aššur's firm seized us against ennam-aššur and ali-ahum, šalim-aššur's sons, and the attorney said: i came here x months ago and you cheat me! also, for 2 months your father's investors ... the missive ... release ... keep in mind what was sworn by the city and the king! come, show me this very day where they keep your father's copper and silver! i shall release it for you. do not cheat me lest i have an extra expense of at least 12 minas of silver." this is not a formal lawsuit but a witnessed statement. the attorney seized us and ennam-aššur answered: "i submit to the messenger of my lord. come, ... let us collect ... in durhumit so let us leave! do not obstruct me." ali-ahum said: "i answered ababa right away, and i shall not go to durhumit. come, ... customers ... come, ..." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by kuzilānum, by aššur-rabi; nimmar-adad was our (absent) partner."
21 large beams, 23 of smaller size; 6 large wooden boards, 8 of smaller size
221 minas of šikku-copper owed by itūr-ilī and his brother; 127 minas of copper owed by malitil; 10 minas owed by hamalia; ... ... 9.5 minas of copper owed by ...; 2 minas owed by ...maya ... ...
9 minas of refined copper due from urdum, who serves karum durhumit. 1 mina of sikku-copper due from assur-idi, son of istar-bani. two jars of cumin, with his seal, 13 ... saddlecloths — all this belongs to kuliya.
of the 100 pirikannus and 4 black donkeys that they brought to our father in durhumit, thereof the servants took 4 pirikannus for their clothing;
thus lamassutum, puzur-aššur and ennam-aššur, say to ataya, ir'am-aššur, ummī-išhara and šīmat-ištar: unfortunately your mother and both your brothers are dead. when your mother was on her deathbed, we seized three affiliated traders and brought them inside, to your mother and in the presence of these three affiliated traders your mother, while she was alive, opened her coffers and they saw every shekel of silver, her cash money that there was and she gave 2 1 / 4 shekels of gold and 8 shekels of silver to you. 37 shekels of silver she gave to your brother iliya, 20 shekels of silver she gave to ilabrat-bāni. while you mother was still alive, before we left for the campaign, iliya was thrown into jail. after he had spent all he had available and (since) iliya was married with the daughter of the anatolian, who had married your mother, that anatolian paid the expenses made for the jail and after the anatolian had recovered his expenses, 27 shekels of silver have been spent for the bewailing of your mother and your brothers. here the representative of the son of hinnāya, the creditor of your brothers, took steps to seize the silver, but ennam-aššur and šumi-abiya, your representatives [] and we said: 'he shall not seize the silver!' who is he ("
iddin-ištar owes 1 mina 10 shekels of silver to issu-arik. if he has not paid 15 shekels of silver when i arrive, then i shall raise claim against him for the silver and the accrued interest for the entire period. (concerning) irišum. witnessed by abum-ilī, witnessed by šalim-aššur.
the plenary kanesh colony passed the following verdict: in conformity with what [they have promised], uṣur-pī-aššur will enter and leave their paternal house together with [his brother] ennam-aššur (and) will eat and drink together with him. he stays married to the maid just as he has married (her), he shall not sell the maid. a report will go to the city, to his sisters and his brothers and until a notice has come back the house and its inventory is their common property. nobody shall sell (anything).""
to būr-suen, ali-ahum, ali-abum and ilī-imittī from the merchant: 10 talents of washed copper, 4 black donkeys and 2 minas of silver, plus further 0.6666 mina 2 shekels of silver, the working-capital for the servant - all this būr-suen, ali-abum and ilī-imittī bring to you. my dear brother, take care to convert the copper to silver, and assist the servants with the proceeds from the copper which they promise to you, and then carry out a (profitable) purchase. take a black donkey from here for the shipment. būr-suen and ilī-imittī bring you 1.5 mina of silver under my seal. take your silver and split my tablet and give it to būr-suen and ilī-imittī. my dear brother, they should not delay; send them to me.
sukkallum owes 11.5 minas of -copper to luzi. reckoned from the month ab-šarrāni, eponymy kūbiya, he must add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. witnessed by uzuwa, by iddin-abum.
2.3333 minas of refined silver, under my seal, belalaya brought away; 3 shekels of silver i gave him for expenses, 2 shekels of silver for , 3.5 minas of copper with a value of 4 shekels of silver (for) small wares. all this ... ... ... ... and aššur-mūtappil brought away. in the presence of adad-bāni, son of ganaya, (and) of kulumaya. as for aššur-imittī, 25 shekels of silver (and) 1 shekel gold atahšu brought him.
say to elamma, thus aššur-rē'ī: 4 talent 20 minas of tin under seals (and) 121 textiles, all this i am leading to you.""
thus kanesh, say to the -payers, our messenger, every single colony, and the trading stations: a letter of the city has arrived. in the letter of the city (it is written): from this day on, whoever buys meteoric iron, (the city of) assur is not part of the profit made, the tithe on it kanesh will collect." as soon as you have heard our letter, who(ever) over there has either sold it to a palace, or has offered it to palace officials, or still carries it with him without having yet sold it - all meteoric iron he carries, write the exact amount of every (piece of) meteoric iron, his name and the name of his father in a tablet and send it here with our messenger. send a copy of (this) letter of ours to every single colony and to all the trading stations. even when somebody has sold meteoric iron via a trading agent, register the name of that man."
from ennānum to idnaya and aššur-...: in accordance with what i wrote to you with my orders that ... leads - urgent, pay attention and guard my goods and my donkeys like your own life as you are a gentleman. when aššur-imittī went to the city he brought some 2 or 3 minas of silver on his own, and in the city aššur-imittī took 0.5 mina of silver, the working capital of halgiaššu. clear what textiles and tin he brings on his own and let it remain with him. send me word. also, carry out ... in accordance with my instructions i sent to you. also, with respect to the interest(?) of aššur-imittī he must not lie and make me angry at you.
... they are to pay at the melting of the snow.
3.5 minas of silver of uzua hinnāya took at my expense. in the presence of aššur-bēl-awātim, son of šu-anum, of ennam-adad, son of zira. his investors had contractually bound me to (provide it) for making purchases.
from lamassi to ennam-aššur: why is it that you do not send your messages to your father? ali-ahum will not ... that i write to him. if you please, ... why ... that you write ... concerning your (plur.) father ... to ... that i have become indebted for ... that you sent ... why have you denounced our father's house in ...? is your father's ... your own affairs are so small!
to ... and ali-ahum from ennum-aššur; specifically to ali-ahum: my messages have come to you a couple of times concerning the investors of our father, that we should clear (the matter); also, for ... on which they have laid claim, when the road opens ... later, as the servants arrived from šalatuwar and did not bring any silver, and in addition to ... you repeated ... investors ... and its resolution that we shall hear about.. as to the copper, they will pack it for him and it will be exchanged for silver. the matter with man-mahir has been settled. every shekel of silver that i have produced, i shall place before them. šēp-ištar leads the copper ..., 2 black donkeys, 10 bags plus their harness to you. in addition to x mina which stand there, 3 talents of copper, owed by man-mahir, that he left with you ...
from man-mahir to ali-ahum: i have sent word to you both once and twice - concerning the textiles that are in luhuzattiya. if they have brought them in there, then convert them to silver in accordance with my instructions. if they have not brought them in, send me word with the first transport to inform me. as to the 1 mina of silver that hattu owes for the guards, i hold his certified tablet; his terms are overdue. ... i have been booked as guarantor for aššur-malik son of innaya. have aššur-malik assist you there, seize him and make him pay the silver. if he has not paid the silver, take out his wife and daughter, my security, and let them stay in your house.
from the merchant to ennam-aššur, damiq-pī-aššur and ali-ahum: my dear brothers, as for every shekel of silver you have received from my outstanding claims or that has been cleared from my goods- send damiq-pī-aššur to me (with it) ... send him the very day you hear my letter! earlier ... of the merchant ... you realised every shekel of silver, and silver was cleared for me from my goods. you have had the silver seized, and in accordance with the message from the merchant you must not delay me. arrange a caravan trip for me and encourage the merchant, so his ill-wishers will not multiply. damiq-pī-aššur said: now, i have informed you about the copy of the missive that i am bringing." my dear brothers, take care - 1.3333 mina of tin from ... at my disposal i gave to eništārum. "
from ... to ... and aššur-imittī; specifically to ali-ahum: while your brother was alive you trusted in your brother, and still, until today you have not cleared me. today, in whom do you trust? you yourself are in your father's house and all the water has fallen back upon you. urgent, take care there, clear yourself, set out and come! here interest on the silver due to the city hall has increased for you, so if you are delayed, then have the silver of the city hall procured, seal it and give it to the attorney that he may bring it so we can satisfy the eponym. to ali-ahum: do not be afraid at all with respect to lā-qēp there. also, while your brother was alive he often write you there in order to conclude his affair. ... as ... šu-kūbum is alive ...
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: give to a trustworthy affiliated trader 1 mina of silver, 5 minas of copper, 5 minas of sickles, bronze pins worth 5 shekels of silver and -rings - with the first transport, so they may bring it. concerning the narrow track i keep hearing that orders are strict. my dear brother, send word to inform me. i left 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver under my seal for ennānum son of abiya in purušhaddum. ennānum said as follows: i gave ... to ataya and he sent ... to you. i questioned ataya, saying: "ennānum has sent you with silver. give me the silver." ataya answered: "in case ennānum has given me any silver i shall pay you three times back." i bound him over him with 2 affiliated traders as witnesses. seize ennānum and have him pay the silver and send it to me. if you observe that the narrow track is not opened up then send it with the caravan itself. close up ... with straw worth 2 shekels of silver for me. my dear brother, i hear that they have not yet sent my maid. take care so they bring her."
thus elamma, <say> to aššur-rēṣī: ali-ahum and i myself we wrote a letter to iliya and to you in which we said: 'make purchases with what accrues to us as (the yield of) the merchandise of our paternal house and send them to ali-ahum and me'. why have you failed to make purchases?aššur-rēṣī told (me): in accordance with ali-ahum's instruction ......... in the gate ......"
from the 0.3333 mina of silver that was ilabrat-bāni's share we booked 2 shekels for the bewailing, 2.6666 shekels of silver for wheat we gave to lullu, 2 jars of beer we took on the day of the bewailing. on the second day we paid 3 1 / 4 shekels for 2 sheep, 3 / 8 shekel for firewood, 1 / 4 shekel for , 1 / 4 shekel for reed, 1 / 12 shekel for onions, 1 / 12 shekel for reed for the jars, 2.1666 shekels for a 'naked' sheep; 7 jars of beer we drew, 3 / 8 shekel; on the second day 4 jars of beer we drew; 1 shekel of silver (for) the son of aššur-dān and 1.3333 shekel for lullu, for wheat, we added; 7 / 12 shekel for 2 jars of beer we paid; 1 shekel silver we paid for a sheep.
31 pirikannus, one single burā'u-textile plus a black donkey and its harness, 5 sacks
2 pairs of , of extra-fine quality, itūr-ilī is to bring to ennam-aššur when he returns.
the sons of iddin-abum said as follows to šalim-aššur: for which things do you detain us? inform us!" šalim-aššur answered: "i paid 43 minas of silver in the city from my joint-stock capital out of silver not my own on the order of issu-arik to cover your father's debt. i am the guarantor: i sue you for the silver, the interest and the compound interest. for these things i detain you. furthermore, 8 minas of silver, my funds, that šu-bēlum took in hahhum, for that i sue šu-bēlum alone. so, i shall check my tablets that are in anatolia, and tomorrow i shall tell you how much silver i have paid for your father's debt, and how much silver belonging to your father i have received." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by lā-qēp son of aššur-malik, by abatanānum son of aššur-šamšī, by ennānum son of amriya."
i and ali-ahum settled accounts here concerning the price of 17 minas of tin at the rate 1:8.5 (its value in silver is 2 minas) that adida gave to me and which i personally sent to timelkiya to ali-ahum: after he gave me the proceeds from 3 kutānu-textiles as aššur-kāšid's working capital and i set down 8 shekels per piece for him, then both the proceeds from his 5 minas of tin that ... with dan-aššur ... the deficit ... was deducted and ... 9 shekels ... and some 4 shekels of silver that he deducted ... ennam-aššur set down 1 mina 7.5 shekels of refined silver as owed by ali-ahum. witnessed by erišum son of amur-šamaš, by šu-aššur son of ...-aššur, by šu-ištar son of šukkutum.
8 shekels of refined silver ikūn-mīšar owes to elamma. he will pay when he returns from the city. in the presence of šu-ištar.
seal of the kanesh colony; to the station at kuburnat. ... for his extradition. let him extradite the man there with our messenger šēp-ištar. and you must be the executive arm for our messenger.
aššur-ṭāb will bring 1 thin textile of fine quality for ennam-aššur up here when he comes up from the city. witnessed by ennam-aššur son of narām-suen. ennam-aššur will send him 3 shekels of silver, the corresponding amount for the -flour of the widow, with aluwa.
of the 40 talents of good copper about which iddin-aššur reached an agreement with the investors, of that ali-ahum paid 6.6666 minas of refined silver, and iliya received the silver on behalf of šu-kūbum, his brother. in addition to this silver ennam-aššur will add 8.3333 minas of silver, so in all there will be 15 minas of silver.twice it will cross over in a caravan and šu-kūbum will be satisfied with his silver. witnessed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by mannum-kī-aššur son of šime-bēli, by aššur-malik son of aššur-taklāku, (grand)son of šu-illil.
seal of uraya son of manana, seal of amurrum-bāni son of manana. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. buzutaya was our third man.
to ennam-anum from kakkaba: the merchant belittles me here. you said to ašašabi: i shall go. i shall not delay 2 months." today the merchant detains me from going to maliya. as for the 10 minas of copper that i promised, zuba's son has not given it to me; i have borrowed 10 minas of copper against interest in the house of an anatolian and your servant ... today i am running around (as) your servant. the god should know whoever receives her lord's favour."
from iddin-suen to damiq-aššur and ali-ahum: concerning the missive about bēlum-bāni that you left me, one of you should come and receive your silver. your silver should not disappear. concerning bēlum-bāni it is not appropriate for me to leave instructions here; he will not go overland to tišmurna. to damiq-pī-aššur: apparently you have forgotten the matter we discussed. do come here, come here, so we can do what the situation demands.
the ... colony passed a verdict, stating that šalim-aššur and the sons of iddin-abum will each say binding words to each other outside (the city). within 3 days no one among them may go away (from here).
to ... and ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: if uku son of ṣilūlu lives there, send him. ... at least 10 shekels of silver ... i am alone ... to judges ... approach ennānum ... send ... to me, for he received every shekel of silver.
to ilī-bāni and kuliya, say, this is what aššur-ennam says: in šalatiwar kuliya gave me 0.83333 mina of silver under his seal. i brought it to wahšušana to you and i said: herewith i entrust to you the silver under the seals of kuliya. it is the silver you promised to pay the as -tax on behalf of kuliya." you said: "yes, i promised it." in the presence of aššur-lamassī, son of aššur-mālik and of šu-išhara, son of ennam-suen, the ...., i entrusted the packet to you. what did my paternal house that your brother came back on me? in al-timniyē you approached me and in the presence of ennam-suen, son of issūrik, and of uzua, son of kukkulānum, you interrogated me, saying: "when you had me bring the silver with my brother's seals, who was then ?" i answered: "aššur-lamassī and šu-išhara were the, and it was in their presence that i entrusted you the silver." i seized uṣur-ša-ištar, son of dadaya, in nehriya and merchandise of his worth 1 mina had become 4 minas of silver for him and so our affair was . i booked 1 mina of silver as due by him. [x] silver iddin-aššur, son of šu-bēlum, promised me [in a ]. he will send me the [silver] from what will (come in) from mamma or from tegra<ma>. ... and by witnesses ... which he promised ... due by aššur-bāni, of [... which ...] ... i myself gave him will be converted into ...""
seal of belanum, son of su-kubum, seal of agua, son of dan-assur, seal of usur-sa-istar, son of dadaya. 1 mina of refined silver belanum, son of su-kubum, owes to kulia, son of ali-abum. he will pay within one year and six months. if belanum does not pay when his term is due in conformity with the rule of the karum he will add 1.5 shekel of interest per mina per month. month v, eponymy of iddin-suen, son of iddin-abum. seal of ikuppiya, son of pilah-istar, seal of ili-bani, son of mutalum, seal of assur-re'i, son of usuranum. 8 shekels of refined silver ikuppiya, son of pilah-istar, owes to kuliya, son of ali-abum. he will pay within 6 months. if he does not pay he will add interest in conformity with the rule of the karum. ... silver, a loan belonging to kuliya, son of ali-abum, ennam-suen, son of zarniqum holds; he is held by the silver. if he goes away to somebody else, he will hire someone in his place and he will compensate the wages of the hireling. seal of ili-malik, son of adad-ellat, seal of iddin-assur, son of su-belum, seal of ennam-suen, son of titinatal. 10 shekels of refined silver ili-malik, son of adad-ellat, owes to kuliya, son of ali-abum. per mina he will add 12 shekels as interest per year. either in the city or in the countryside, wherever he will be seen, he will pay the silver. month v, eponymy of su-rama, sons of uzua.
to ikūn-pīya, abuwa, erišum, kudātum, šu-ištar and enna-suen from ennam-aššur; specifically to enna-suen: may aššur and the god of our fathers reject you, since you stood ready to separate me from my father's breast! you have owed 4 minas of refined silver since the month ša-kēnātim, in the eponymy aššur-nādā son of puzur-anna and i hold your certified tablet. you promised to pay the silver in 20 weeks. you will have to pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. your terms are exceeded by 4 years. has any silver been left for me? further, for every mina of silver that they have cleared as owed by you - reckoned from the month ša-sarrātim, eponymy ... you must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month. here i hold a tablet of 5 investors ... per one mina ... 3.3333 mina ... and you must pay 0.5 mina of silver as expenditures; apart from x minas of silver from ikūnum's son and my available goods for which i sue him, say to my representatives: seize him for all this silver and have him seal the silver and the accrued interest and send it (the resulting document) to me and to his representatives, so his representatives here may pay me the silver and the accrued interest; then i shall give his deed to his representatives. to my representatives: my dear brothers, if enna-suen answers you ... send me his answer soon and let him travel here. "
from ali-ahum to šalim-wardī and aluwa: why is it that the guides have been arguing here, saying: your servants refuse to ship the grain." of the city ... waliwali ... you (plur.) said to them as follows: "haul the grain before spring! urgent! - take care and ship the grain." nothing must remain. ship the rest of the grain here. send me word as to whether it is shipped or not. i shall come. "
when i went to hahhum: 5 shekels for small goods,
seal of uzua, seal of iddin-abum, seal of sukkallum son of iddin-suen. sukkallum owes 11.5 minas of -copper to luzi. month ab-šarrāni, eponymy kūbiya. he must add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony.
šep-ištar and šalim-wardi have entrusted 1 kutanum of good quality, 1 kutanum of secondary quality, 1 thin textile, 1 akkadian textile — under šalim-aššur's seal — to ali-abum and iddin-assur. witnessed by buzuwa, by tab-sill-aššur.
say to puzur-aššur, idnāya and ikūn-pī-aššur thus šu-ištar, say (in particular) to idnāya: 3 minas of refined silver you owe (me), your term is 12 weeks overdue. please, my brother, pay the silver and its interest and let them give it to where i will instruct'. say to my representatives: 'take care to to make him pay the silver and the interest on it and transfer it to where i will instruct'.""
1.5 mina of refined silver due from aššur-nādā, son of ernu''id; when he returns from the city he will pay; if he does not pay he will add 1.5 shekel per month per mina (as interest). 39 shekels of silver and a -textile due from the native; he will pay within one month. 2.5 minas of refined silver aššur-taklāku owes to elamma; from the week of ennamānum he will add 1.5 shekel per month per mina; his tablet is here. the price of 2 textiles, 0.3333 mina of refined silver, is with amur-aššur, son of ilī-bāni. 4 -textiles with iddin-aššur. 4.5 shekels of silver with ennānum, the fuller. 15 shekels of silver and a robe in the style of malkua i gave to ṣilli-adad to buy textiles; thereof he sent me 1 textile. 4 1 / 4 shekels of silver of the lady i gave to dāya. 24 shekels of refined silver i gave to ennam-aššur, son of uzua, as a free loan. 0.5 mina of silver aššur-nādā will pay when the returns from burušhattum. 5.3333 shekels silver are with amur-šamaš. 0.3333 mina of silver ... of iliya, son of aššur- ..., [id]nāya brought away. 10 shekels of silver with šu-ištar. 1 shekel [with qaqqadānum. 4 shekels with šu-bēlum. 2 shekels with idnāya. 4 talents of wool and a i left inside the house.
from man-mahir to baziya, šu-hubur, kulma-kulma and puzur-ištar: as to the 3 minas of silver under my seal that ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur brought to you, my dear brothers, stand up and buy good for me and send them with the very first transport. ask for a donkey at a merchant's house. indicate the name of the merchant on the hem of the . my dear brothers, take care to ship it with the very first transport.
the 0.3333 mina of silver that i owed to susaya, after 1 / 4 shekel has been added to the stone of my 0.3333 mina-weight.
from ikūn-piya to ennam-aššur, lā-qēp, ... anna-anna and šu-...: ... tin ... tin ... silver ... buy 20 minas of tin for me and add 40 minas of tin in your possession and in all send me 1 talent of tin. the tin should ... ennam-aššur should seal the 40 minas of tin in your possession. the tin that you purchase yourselves, you personally must seal it together with him. buy textiles from talhat for the rest of my silver. if there are none from talhat, then make a profitable purchase for me. my dear brothers, take care to send me adad-pilah. to ennam-aššur: pay heed to what i instructed you to do, my dear brother, and send my servant.
apart from (what is mentioned in) his certified tablet kutibiš owes 1.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver.
i furthermore gave 1 mina of good, native copper for an allu'āru-container of sweet wine from mamma to puzur-amurrum son of nimar-ištar.
seal of enna-suen son of iddin-abum, seal of aššur-taklāku son of ikūnum, seal of pilah-ištar son of aššur-rēʾī. pilah-ištar son of aššur-rēʾī owes 6.83333 minas of refined silver to the merchant. reckoned from the week of enna-suen son of kurara he will pay back the silver in 7 weeks. if he has not paid back at the completion of his term, he will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. month ab-šarrāni, in the eponymy šu-suen son of babilum. i paid 3 shekels of silver to šu-ištar son of malik-ilišu. i paid 2.5 shekels of silver for a -measure of acorns and gave them to muza. 2 shekels of silver, the price of 2 belts for aššur-malik son of luzina. all this i paid on behalf of kudātum.
from kuziya to ennam-aššur: we broke open the copper sealed by šu-zuzu. we checked (the copper): 51.5 minas of good copper, and we broke open the good copper under your seal and checked 46 minas; as for the bad copper we checked it (and found) 37 minas - total of your copper, both good and bad: 2 talents 14.5 minas; šalim-wardī brings that to you under my seal. the wool - both expenses, import duty and deficit - has been cleared as 4 talents less 5 minas. they bring you my tablet with your seal.
from innaya to aššur-ṭāb and puzur-aššur: the king and queen here have written to the road-guards concerning smuggling, saying: seize anyone you observe carrying textiles and tin in the land, and then withhold the tin and textiles and lead the criminal to me." also, they have written to the narrow track. urgent, do not smuggle tin and textiles and do not commit anything to the narrow track. urgent, the orders are strict. do not send anything lest you be sorry. let him hear the letter and send it to aššur- ṭāb."
the servants of asānum, who belongs to the house of asqūdum, and pilah-ištar, son of elamma, together went on a business trip and in hurama they together entered kubiya's house and the palace levied the import-tax from them together. afterwards merchandise was seized and the palace took away asānum's merchandise. the tin that pilah-ištar had hidden in kubiya's house, was saved in the lodging and when belānum came he claimed the right to take the tin in pilah-ištar's name and kubiya entrusted the tin to bēlānum, the son of šu-aššur. bēlānum declared: i take the responsibility!" in accordance with the tablet of the city the plenary hurama colony made us available and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by aššur-šadu-ilī, by ir'am-aššur, son of aššūr-mālik, and by abu-šalim, son of šu-ištar."
... month qarra'ātum, eponymy buzuzu. he will give me 20 minas of silver and i shall lay claim to that. witnessed by aššur-rabi, by aššur-šamšī, by pilah-aššur. 10 minas of refined silver is owed by our own puzur-anna. reckoned from the week of aššur-taklāku and kasiya he is to pay in 30 weeks. if he has not paid (in time), he will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. month te'inātum, eponymy amur-aššur son of karriya. witnessed by puzur-adad son of iddin-ištar, by dumqaya son of kurub-ištar. ... receive ... on to of the silver ... aššur-taklāku ...
sealed by akuza son of šu-anum, by lā-qēp son of illil-bāni, by ṣilūlu son of uku. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave a tablet before aššur's dagger in the gate of the god.
thus says aššur-šad-ilī to kuliya and aššur-lam[assī] and in particular to kuliya: because of the affair of sabasiya's house, the case that was not settled in your presence, latarāk has seized your merchandise that you had left behind in apum. when i heard it i availed myself of a tablet of the elders and a messenger who went to apum and obtained the release of the merchandise and abī-wēdum is now leading that to you. as for your house, uṣurānum refuses to give either copper or gold saying: all has already been payed." from a merchant we borrowed beer bread for the banquet and for drinking flasks and we gave them to ilī-bāni's wife. there is absolutely no reason to get nervous. gentleman as you are, convert your merchandise into silver and come immediately here. my dear brother, realize that every single shekel of silver at hand [will be used?] for the banquet. ... tell aššur-lamassī: 'send the silver (and so) encourrage us!' let him give the yield of his textiles if good quality to aššur-ṣululī. do not make him angry."
concerning the fact that iddin-abum owes 24 minas of silver to aššur-bēl-awātim: his son šu-kūbum has sealed the houses where šalim-aššur lives and taken out the maid and the slaves; but out of the iron that šalim-aššur claimed at the city hall and invested in iddin-aššur son of aššur-malik, and which they brought to kanesh, šu-kūbum son of aššur-bēl-awātim has taken šalim-aššur's share to cover iddin-abum's debt, and he will release the houses, the maid and the slaves to šalim-aššur's representatives. the kanesh colony has given us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before the dagger of aššur. witnessed by akuza, by amurrum-bāni, by lā-qēpum. itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar was our (absent) partner.
56.5 shekels of silver, which suhurpiyala owes to suettata, that silver āl-ṭāb has paid. suhurpiyala (!) will make a business trip and if there is profit, he will take it (the silver) from the profit. if there is no profit aliya and harša will pay the silver and the interest on it to āl-ṭāb. in the presence of šilmašu, of šuppunuman.
from šu-ištar to šuma-libši, ilī-ālum and amur-ištar; specifically to šuma-libši and ilī-ālum: you owe 14 shekels of refined silver. i hold your certified tablet. your terms are overdue by a year. the silver (loan) was with joint liability. the silver was merchant-silver". pay the silver and its interest there to amur-ištar. to amur-ištar: urgent, pay attention and have the silver and its interest paid."
say to elamma, thus ištar-pilah: hinnāya holds 3 minas of tin and one must not open (the packet) lest he gets angry. take care to send me 1.5 mina of silver. that i did not write you (earlier) is because hinnāya said: 'if a message of yours arrives i will send it to you.' (but now) i wrote: 'do not let the silver get lost, take care to send me the silver!' may at least some silver be produced! the silver is not his silver, it is the silver of iddin-suen!""
if za... šalim-aššur. if ašet is safe ... ...
they brought me 4.3333 minas 4 shekels of silver and 3.3333 shekels of gold, the proceeds from my textiles, from wahšušana.
1.3333 mina and 2 shekels of silver on behalf of kuliya, son of ali-abum, i paid to assur-malik son of kurara. the golden gods of ili-pi-usur and an encased tablet of 1.6666 mina of silver, being the debt of kulia, amur-samas and ennam-assur i hold as pledge. when ana-x's son and ili-pi-usur's attorney come here they will pay me the silver and i will release the gods. as for the tablet, it will be cancelled. should they not pay the silver, then kuliya will pay me the silver and the interest on it, wherever we meet. month ix, eponymy of assur-re'i, son of ili-emuqi. when i paid the silver ennam-assur and amur-samas, son of ili-pi-usur, acted as beru. in the presence of assur-malik, of sukkaliya, of mannum-balum-assur.
1.6666 mina of silver under my seal for ah-šalim, 0.5 mina of silver under my seal for iddin-aššur, ṣeher-ilī
thus [amur]-istar, to kuliya: "several times i wrote you concerning my retailer amurrum-bani because of the price of my textiles, but you have never sent me any information! i here have concern for your interests, but you have never, not even for a single day, sacrificed your own interests to care for mine! [...] silver, the price paid for [my textiles], make both assur-ennam [... salim]-assur [...] and amurrum-bani pay that silver and send amurrum-bani to me. send me a message if they try to rob me of my silver and keep me informed. assur-bani, son of iddin-abum, owes me 1 mina of silver, make him pay and send it to me. one mina of silver is owed by assur-ennam, son of [...], whatever is owed to me by him, by samas-ennam, the servant of assur-ennam, and what is owed by salim-assur, make them pay!".
to kuziziya, lā-qēp and anna-anna from ennam-aššur; to anna-anna: before i went to katila i left you 5 sacks of wheat and 2 sacks of barley in addition. further, they carted 17 sacks 2 jars of wheat and 17 sacks 2 jars of barley from tumliya. all the grain plus the silver from the natives my father had designated for me. urgent, do not open it up for the lady and give her nothing. also, i sent her directions with ewarimuša. my dear brothers, instruct her there so that there will be no wrongdoing in my storeroom to make me unhappy. do place my tablets and furniture under guard. inform me how much grain was spent for the mourning-ritual. until my brother reveals to me my father's assets i shall be delayed. before i came ali-ahum had opened the strong-room and even taken out the assets. whether lā-qēp has received silver from my outstanding claims or anything remains from ewarimuša's transport, or the 1.5 mina of silver and 3.1666 shekels of gold that is with my maid - make first a profitable purchase for me and send it with ewarimuša.
seal of elalī, son of ikūnum, seal of šalim-ahum, son of dān-aššur, seal of ennam-suen, son of sukkalliya, seal of iddin-aššur, son of aššur-mālik, that ilšu-rabi, son of bulāli, owes 1 mina 1.5 shekel of silver to elamma. from month v?, eponymy of šu-h[ubur?] he will pay within 3 months. if he does not pay he will add (interest) in accordance with the rule of the colony. he had stolen silver and the colony had convicted him to (pay) the triple.
10.1666 shekels of silver for emmertum; 3 shekels of silver for šāt-ilī and nahištum; 3 shekels of silver for hattum; a sash for bēlassunu; a dress for lamassī - all this i gave to aššur-malik son of usāriya. 2 shekels of silver for sacrifices. witnessed by kūbiya (and) aššur-pilah son of amur-aššur. a textile for wardānum; shoes for uṣur-ša-aššur; 3 shekels of silver for amur-aššur and emmertum; 1.5 shekel of silver for his sacrifice - all this i gave to ennam-aššur son of kurkurānum. witnessed by karriya from the family of sukkalliya.
2.5 -textiles iliya will give as compensation, he will get 1.5 shekel of silver. 31.6666 shekels kurub-ištar will give as compensation, 5.6666 shekels aššur-lamassī.
to ali-ahum from zukuwa: althought you are my brother and friend, as if we were strangers you do not inform me. do not say to yourself: he has appointed an agent (to function) together with me." do i trust those others the way i trust you? although i personally pay attention to your instructions, you have not paid attention to my instructions. my instructions have come to you five times! the tablet concerning 12 minas of silver ... i am alone. ... have ... paid. as you hear the letter send me word to wahšušana whether or not the silver is paid, and pay the goods. i personally ..."
ennam-aššur said to aššur-ṭāb: i did not leave the city of assur together with you; we shall not declare our consignment jointly but one has set witnesses for the other; we did not leave the colony together, i do not know you; in accordance with the policy of the city of assur any assyrian will go where it is profitable for him; you too went where it was profitable for you. and i as well went where it was profitable for me in accordance with the policy of my city; so. you are not my partner." this is not a formal lawsuit but a witessed statement. witnessed by anah-ilī son of puzur-anna, by aduduwa son of ennam-anum, by ennau-suen son of itūr-ilī, by šu-anum son of šu-suen. "
from aššur-bāni to šuppi-numan, ummī-išhara, his wife and hanu: i have heard words that were not good but diminishing. it is urgent that you guard the house, the tablets and anything else there! if a..., aššur-muttabbil or aššur-rē’ī asks you for anything, also tablets, then it is imperative that you do not give them anything! as hanu has been instructed, every shekel that he receives in accordance with the tablets is hanu’s share. do not hold it back! let him receive it. also, if he demands all the tablets from you, then do not hold him back but let him take them. as for the tablet concerning the balance payment of bēlānum son of šu-aššur that i left for our mother, hanu should bring that to me. it is urgent that you stand guard! as for the tablets, let hanu take them! he must not take the tablets in the hands of asānum son of šu-hubur or my brothers and you must not set our father’s house up for a lawsuit. the young man is no good. take care and stand guard!
to ennam-aššur from anna-anna: after your father died your brother sent a letter to the city and all the goods that were in your father's house you / she brought outside into your brother's hands. as for you, for the goods that you got hold of - since you yourself appointed an agent, i am afraid and shall do nothing. also, why do you constantly write to me, saying: for ... 1 or 2 minas ... you alone ... and you alone have been for your father. also, as to the bundle that you sent me, in your letter - ... was written ... 0.3333 mina of silver they paid for the mourning ceremony. later ..."
iddin-abum owes 22 minas 10 shekels of refined silver to aššur-malik. he is to pay before šu-illil arrives. if he has not paid (in time), he will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. witnessed by aššur-emūqī, by ennam-aššur s. of menaya.
puzur-ištar son of dan-aššur owes 2.5 minas of refined silver to aššuriš-takal. month kuzallu, eponymy aššur-imittī, the skipper. he is to pay within 3 months; if he has not paid (in time) he shall add interest according to the rule of the colony. he is to pay the silver wherever we meet. witnessed by ṣilluš-dagān son of ištar-pilah, by ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur.
bēlānum seized us against lipit-ištar, son of lalum, and bēlānum said: to lipit-ištar: you will pay me 1.5 mina of silver within 6 weeks reckoned from the week eponymy of šu-ištar, son of aššur-bāni. if you have not paid me you will add for me an interest of 3 / 4 shekel per mina per month." lipit-ištar answered: "i will add it for you". month viii, year eponymy of ennam-suen, son of šu-ištar. for these words the hurama colony made us available and before aššur's dagger we gave our testimony. in the presence of šuzuzu, son of aššur-rē'ī, of ennam-aššur, son of elamma."
seal of ikūn-pīya son of aššur-bāni; to ennam-aššur, iddin-abum and lā-qēp ...
āl-ṭāb seized us against amur-aššur and āl-ṭāb said to amur-aššur: have you and šu-ištar not promised (or: been ordered) to pay each half of the silver?" amur-aššur answered: "true, we have promised (or: been ordered) to pay each half of the silver and also (that) ... ... would receive as share one third of (so the envelope) the profit and that he (also) would be responsible for one third of the losses". in the presence of atatiya, of ahu-waqar, of aššur-šamšī. concerning subārum / the subaraean, of the ransom."
a tablet about 10 shekels of silver, the working capital of abu-šalim, son of puzur-ištar; a tablet with puzur-aššur's seal, he will not come back on 10 shekels of silver; a tablet about 0.3333 mina of silver, the working capital of abiaya, son of <u>zua; a tablet about 10 shekels of silver of ilī-mālik, son of adad-ellat; a tablet about 10 shekels of silver of ennam-suen, son of zarniqum, of his working capital; and a tablet of 13.1666 shekel of silver (of) ennam-suen, son of ali-abum; a tablet about 10 shekels of silver of laqēpum, son of agua; a letter of ali-ahum and the son of kuziziya; a tablet of 0.5 mina of silver of šumaya. in all 9 tablets in a tablet box, to be read (and) thrown away(?).
to ali-ahum and ikūn-pī-aššur from zalidi: i owe 53 shekels of refined silver plus further 0.5 mina of checked (silver) to šu-aššur son of iddin-aššur. the tablet concerning 4 minas of silver which the agent ... owes to our father, he holds as security. my dear lord, pay the silver to šu-aššur, get out my tablet and let it be with you. also, send me word so i can set out and leave. also, with respect to šamaš-bāni's tablet we sued both once and twice, but your representatives refuse to give the tablet. send word to your (representatives ...)
3 missives sealed by sakliya ... ... placed ... in the city with ma... and ...ki as witnesses.
the silver that her mother left to her daughter as part of the outstanding claims, do you (plur.) want to take it for the debt, for her brothers?" we took action and rebutted them by our argumentation. after the expenses made for the bewailing of your mother and your brothers had been deducted, the rest of the silver, 37 shekels of silver, and 2 1 / 4 shekels of gold, under the seals of ennam-aššur and šumi-abiya we together entrusted to ennam-ilī, the son of hadāya, and he is on his way to you with it. in the packet of silver 2 1 / 4 shekels of silver of iliya, excise for (the city of) aššur, have been put. give that silver to the office of the this silver was in elamma's house. there are still two ṣ-containers with tablets sealed by your brothers and mother. we did not dare to open them because we were afraid. have you not heard that the anatolian is since ten years married to your mother and that she lived in the house of the anatolian? do by no means expect much silver, (there are only) the afore-mentioned silver and the seal your mother.""
reckoned from the week eponymy of ali-ahum and buṣiya we paid the silver during that of naram-suen and ikūnum.
unabi and ašiat owe 15 minas of washed copper, weighed with our stones, to luzi. reckoned from the week of amurrum-bāni and aššur-nādā they must pay within 4 weeks. if they have not paid (in time), they must add interest according to the rule of the colony. they must pay the copper in purušhaddum. month hubur, eponymy iddin-abum. witnessed by iddin-abum son of itūr-ilī.
to ali-ahum from zukuwa: before i came your tin was sold. the weight of your tin was 1 talent 30 minas; 0.5 mina they established as losses. i questioned your representatives, saying: "how did you sell the tin?" they answered: "it was sold at the rate 8 (shekels) minus 22.5 grains. seize the silver and 11.3333 minas 2 shekels was the rest of your tin." before i arrived you had not (been) paid the silver; the day i arrived i had the silver paid and the silver is under our seals. since there is no affiliated trader among the travellers who can be responsible for some 10 minas of silver, for that reason we held the silver back. do not get angry. the silver is ready. within 5 days šu-hubur has promised to leave. we shall send you your silver with šu-hubur. i made šukkutum pay 4 minas of silver from what was in his certified tablet. total of your silver, both from the proceeds from the tin ... from šukkutum; in all šu-hubur will bring you 15 minas 11 shekels of silver under our seals, also the proceeds from 8 minas of tin, from the šilipki'u that ilī-ašrannī brought; 7 shekels were given to šukkutum — both the tin and that from the šilipki'u and from his tablet, and from the proceeds of your pirikannus — we shall clear with the next transport and send hanu.
thus the kanesh colony, say to the travelers: here suen-damiq has appealed to us and he said: 'i want liptānum, son of qardaya, to be brought back; i take responsibility for bringing him back'. ṭāb-šilli-aššur is our messenger. he must come back with ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur. you must be his executive force.""
seal of aššur-ṭāb, son of ahu-waqar, seal of šu-anim, son of akiānum, seal of aššur-dugul, son of imdī-ahī, seal of aššur-ṭāb, son of idi-bāni, ennam-suen has a claim of 12 shekels of silver on aššur-ṭāb, son of idi-āni; month ii / iii, eponymy of elalī, son of ikūnum. he will add interest according to the regulation of of the kanesh colony.
to adida, ali-ahum and uku from puzur-aššur: the 13 textiles under my seal that i left in ali-ahum's house house, 20 of good quality, 1 ... textile under my seal ... sell that and seal the tin and give it to ... and let him bring it to me. of the 21 textiles that šalim-bēlī and aššur-pilah bring to you give 1 akkadian textile to ištar-lamassī. the very day you hear my letter do not hold back the textile a single day. to ali-ahum: ... give ... to uku ... under my seal.
for the matter of the losses. i, kura <and> šu-ištar will come together and together we will address pilah-ištar, son of uzua, with lā-qēp, ememe and aššur-idī as witnesses. should he prevail over us, then he can present his claim together with us.
1 jar ahuni 1 jar and a... ... ... ... šu-anum, 1 jar šusāya. 1 jar iddin-abum, 1 jar ṣaher-ilī, 1 jar of the maid of ah-šalim, 1 jar ennānum, 1 jar ilī-ašranni 1 jar ilī-bāni, 1 jar amur-šamaš, 1 jar kasāya, 1 jar šarrum-šamaš?, 1 jar zu... ... ... ... 1 jar ahu-waqar, 1 jar pilah-ištar
for 1 mina 32 shekels he has been registered on the tablet. 1.83333 mina you deposited as my share. in all 3.5 minas have been booked in kūn-ilum's name in the colonial office. of the 5 -textiles each? that they deposited in the colonial office, 2 pieces belong to kūn-ilum, thereof i will transfer 0.5 textile from kūn-ilum's share. witnessed by išme-adad, by buzāzu.
to adida, ali-ahum and uku from puzur-aššur: as to the 13 textiles under my seal that i left with you, šalim-bēli brought you (further) 20 good - in all entrust 33 textiles to uku and have him bring them to durhumit. uku brings 4 minas of tin under my seal. if he wants a donkey, then buy one for him. urgent, he must not delay, send him! to uku: did i not speak to you about not delaying? you shall not leave my small goods, a chisel and my woolen fleeces.
the slave-girl kukra, which šamaš-abī, son of zuzānum, <had acquired?> from the boy of hada'ikur, the ,? šallim-aššur, son of iphurum, has bought. he cut off the stalk in our presence. for these words the durhumit colony gave us and before aššur's dagger we gave our testimony. in the presence of labān-nādā, son of iddin-suen, of nabi-suen, son of šu-bēlum, of iddin-ištar, son of iddin-abum, of puzur-ištar, son of dān-aššur.
to kuliya, assur-lamassi and assur-lamassi, thus says assur-emuqi, to assur-lamassi, son of puzur-ili in particular: "you have 3 shekels of silver, given by me, since the eponymy of assur-malik, son of su-hanis. you said: 'i will bring up for you from the city 3 akkadian garments for children'. you brought these textiles up, but did not enter here with me, you went away on a journey. please my brother, my lord, give these three garments for children that you brought up (from assur) to kuliya. if these garments have already been sold, establish how much silver they yielded and give it to kuliya. (then) my dear brother, i will pray for you before assur.' say to my son assur-lamassi: "here you turned to me saying: 'give me a little silver for my expenses and i will send you the merchandise it yields'. i did give you silver and also wool and saddlecloths for a value of 8 shekels of silver, saying: 'i owe a cauldron to the man of mamma, therefore send me a cauldron or a slave'. you answered: 'when they arrive i will send them to you from kanesh'. it is now two years that you manage my silver. be so kind as to give to kuliya that silver or what has been acquired for it during its journeys".
to ṭāb-aššur, šu-bēlum, šu-ištar and ali-ahum from enna-suen; to ali-ahum: i left my tablets under my seal with you, and in among my tablets puzur-suen left you 6 shekels of iron sealed by the ... the investor ... has answered me ... an affiliated trader ... and the tablet ...
from enna-suen to ennam-aššur: my dear brother, my message came to itūr-ilī there concerning the matter where i have been treated badly. you too should turn to itūr-ilī and assist him, and if they have called a lawsuit ... do me a great favour.
ali-ahum seized us against enna-suen, and concerning a tablet sealed by enna-suen stating that ali-ahum owes 20 minas of silver to iṣmid-ilum - that enna-suen settled the matter on behalf of his investor aššur-malik son of ali-ahum, so that with respect to the 20 minas of silver plus interest for which ali-ahum was indebted to iṣmid-ilum - if anyone raises claim against ali-ahum, enna-suen will clear ali-ahum for the silver and interest on behalf of his investor aššur-malik. ali-ahum gave a tablet sealed by enna-suen, stating that he will clear ali-ahum for the silver and interest to enna-suen, and he has invalidated it; also, the tablet stating that ali-ahum owes 20 minas of silver plus interest to iṣmid-ilum - enna-suen gave (that) tablet to ali-ahum and he has invalidated it. witnessed by ṭāb-aššur son of al..., by dumqiya son of ... concerning kuzuzārum and ali-ahum.
2 shekels of -gold of fine quality imlik-aššur owes to ir'am-aššur. from the week of edināya he will pay within 15 weeks. if he does not pay he will add (interest) in accordance with the regulation of the colony. month viii, year eponymy of elālī, son of ikūnum. in the presence of pilah-aššur, son of dannum-ilī, of aššur-mālik, son of azuza.
from innaya to zuzu and puzur-aššur; to zuzu: i hold your certified tablet here concerning 0.6666 mina of silver. my dear brother, buṣānum represents me there. give the silver to buṣānum and write to your representatives that they should seize your tablet. you promised to pay within one year. 25 years have passed since the eponymy of ikuppī...
15 shekels of silver malawašhe owes to the creditor. she will pay within a year, reckoning from the week eponymy of amur-aššur, month iii, year eponymy of the successor of innāya. if she has not paid when her term is over she will add interest in accordance with the regulation of the colony. in the presence of iddin-abum.
seal of amur-ištar; to kalamur.
... my dear brother, i shall not achieve the 4.6666 minas of silver for my representatives but he shall not make me angry. as to the price of the gold from the votive offering that you mentioned, witnessed by kurub-ištar son of puzur-ilī, by ... son of aššur-rē'ī, he will balance with you. ... he did not pay in full ... why do you sue ...? ... luzina's son ... put it within the firewood and ...
to the merchant from šu-ištar: šamaš-bāni and eništarum lead 6 black donkeys and their harness, sacks and containers, to you. 2 shekels of silver (and) 3.5 minas (of copper) for their expenses, plus small goods.
sealed by šalim-aššur son of issu-arik; to ennam-aššur son of uzuwa, hannaya, iddin-kūbum, aššur-imittī son of dudiki, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum.
to adida, ali-ahum and uku from puzur-aššur: of the 21 textiles in our posession that he brought give 1 akkadian textile to ištar-lamassī, ali-ahum's wife. uku brings you 4 minas of tin under my seal. sell the tin and buy him a donkey if he has asked for one. as to her textiles in our possession that he brought, the 13 textiles that they left, give them to uku under my seal so he may bring them. buy a donkey with the 4 minas of tin that uku brought and let uku bring two ... menuniānus from mamma to durhumit. 3.1666 shekels of silver: aššur-idī son of amur-aššur; 2.3333 shekels of silver, adada's security for what they left; 2 shekels: waldi-ilum - give him all this.
to kuliya, thus says hunahuna: anah-ilī and puzur-aššur came here. as for the silver, 1.3333 mina of silver for which anah-ilī had become indebted, over there puzur-aššur consumed (for) 14 shekels of silver, (the rest) 1 mina 6 shekels has been entrusted to somebody else. anah-ilī said: bring me the tablet with my seal then take the silver." but i refused to release that tablet. ennānātum said: "we will not file a complaint lest innaya's son hears about it." since we became afraid, ennānātum and i myself, we opened the storeroom and took out of your tablet coffer the tablet with his seal, which we gave him. the 1 mina 6 shekels of silver i have in my possession. since he did not give me your two letters i also did not release to him the tablet of aššur-ṭāb. not one of your representatives came into action. when the servants had come here, they were looking for the silver of ennānātum, but he had absolutely nothing available (and) he was unable to give even 1 single shekel of silver. it is now up to you. i myself obtained 4 shekels of silver (and) i (also) took 2.3333 shekels of samaya. i myself will use that silver for buying salt and then they can make themselves ready and depart. as for the girl, i recovered, i am now well."
1 mina of gold, 8 minas of silver - suen-nādā will give the import duty for the silver and gold in the city - its transport tariff paid - belonging to ennam-aššur son of suen-nādā, on which i have lodged a claim, i have entrusted to suen-nādā and he brought it to iliya and ennam-aššur.
to kuliya, thus says asānum: really, this is the friendliness of alpilī whom i made swear an oath in tegarama - he has disclosed confidential matters of you, and also your good reputation has been besmirched and i have been besmirched together with you! i had told you: do not inform alpilī about your affairs, he ... his word." please my father, my lord, do not think: "out of jealousy he has sent me a letter about his partner!" he has really hurt me terribly. for the rumors i keep hearing, for these matters god be my witness against alpilī! he said to your maid: "there is no ... available. of the two [...] kuliya will marry one as a fine wife. of / with the ... if your maid, all of them(fem.) she will bring to you. don't be worried." apart from 3 shekels of silver he gave her nothing extra and he also did not give he any ... moreover, the slave-girls are idle and do nothing. and because he gave her nothing they keep looking for ... and she is very angry. because of these matters which alpilī told her, when i had arrived for five days she refused to talk with me. ... i arrived here she was staying in the and both my hands are placed on the ... of her head. if i had not arrived at short term we would have been seriously denunciated. she has caused me a lot of trouble until you met her personally. and (when) i myself encouraged her she (said): "how can i go with / in ...? i keep the matter in mind! without ... i will go. he will loosen the ... and then i will go.""
from kiziziya, aššur-malik and amur-ištar to ali-ahum: kiziziya has sold 5 textiles out of the 20 textiles for 5 talents of 50 minas of šikku-copper and 1 textile for 3.3333 shekels of gold; amur-ištar sold 2 textiles for 1 talent 10 minas of washed copper; we sold 6 textiles for 2.3333 minas 4 shekels of silver under our seals and 3.3333 shekels of gold under kuziziya's seal. the rest of the copper is 5 talents 12 minas. amur-ištar and ilī-ašrannī has bought a slave and have left for durhumit. he should credit it to you there. amur-ištar gave 5 minas of copper to the one who brought the textiles to marithum. azu brings you the rest of your textiles: 6 pieces. your textiles have been sold for you. 2 talents of šikku-copper, the price of 4 textiles belonging to ennam-aššur, is in kuziziya's possession.
? minas of ... owed by ... son of sahrudannum. he is to pay in 3 weeks, reckoned from the week of hinnaya. if he has not paid at the completion of his term he will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina.
i gave 4 shekels of silver to amur-ištar's wife.
from man-mahir to ennam-aššur: annina son of aššur-bēl-awātim brought 1 talent 20 minas of washed fine copper. he left his tablet for your father. also, i personally owe him 1 mina 10 shekels of silver. šalim-wardī brings you the 1 mina 10 shekels of silver under my seal. have annina pay you the copper and its accrued interest there, and the ... silver and its accrued interest, and ... the copper ... x minas x shekels of silver ... damiq-pī-aššur ... amur-ištar said: we sold 1 textile worth x mina ..." let damiq-pī-aššur pay you the copper there. the very day you hear my letter you should set out and come and then let us settle accounts. for 11 talents of good copper ... the certified tablet that ṭāb-ṣill-aššur ... to your father ..."
2 minas 8 shekels of silver (of) elamma and šalim-ahum, 93.5 shekels (of silver) of elamma from the caravan of idnaya, ilī-ālum and aššur-idī have deposited in the palace. 4.6666 minas elamma and ali-ahum have deposited in the caravan of lā-qēp, son of qa'atum. 2 minas 38 shekels (of silver) elamma, hinnāya and aššur-kašid have as share in the caravan of šu-anum. 15 1 / 4 shekels elamma has as share in the caravan of ali-ahum and buṣiya. 2 minas 8 shekels elamma has as share in the caravan of azuza and iliš-tikal. 4 minas minus 2 shekels i have as share in the caravan of pūšu-kēn. separately i will receive 13 shekels from the part of lā-qēp. for 2 3 / 4 -textiles elamma is entitled to 55 shekels of silver in the palace from the caravan of ennam-aššur, son of basasa, and from enlil-bāni.
our father deposited 9 textiles at the office of the colony while he was alive. of that 2 textiles have been taken away. 7 textiles are transferred to our father's account. ali-ahum deposited 3 textiles at the price of 38.5 minas of good copper on our father's account. ali-ahum deposited 20 minas of good copper, at the rate in silver 1.5 shekel 22.5 grains, plus 10 shekels of silver.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur and puzur-aššur: when we heard repeatedly here that the land is in uproar and that the orders of the colony are strict, we sent word to you once or twice. but you have not informed us. there, for the sake of the safety of every mina of silver that we bring, send us word and inform us whether the narrow track is safe. send word whether we shall let some 10 minas of tin enter the guard-posts, and pay attention to our instructions. send 2 minas of silver to us en route and send 10 minas of good copper included, for [...] silver send bronze nails and zapru ...
... you sent to me and i shall not meet with the man while he is (still) alive. i shall sell your goods at any price and then i shall come (with) what silver i receive from your outstanding claims, and i shall see your eye there, ... with you and serve you. although i did not reach that realisation(?), my dear father, do not be angry. since they bring šikku-copper and washed copper, one package after another, you owe him favours for me ...
from šu-bēlum to lā-qēp? and ali-ahum: wašibru-bāni brings you 15 textiles (and) 2 covers. give him his wages, x+5 shekels of silver. give 20 minas of wool belonging to šazuwa to issu-arik and let him bring it to your store-room. make šalim-bēli give 4 shekels of silver. give 1 shekel of silver and buy small goods for him.
seal of duduli, head of the market, seal of šuppiahšu, seal of luhuduman, seal of šuppiahšu, seal of babašiba,
2 shekels of silver: azu; 4 shekels of silver: šu-kūbum, his son;
say to elamma, thus aššur-rē'ī: you wrote me as follows: 'send me the tablets with letters that you took along from the city'. [šum]i-abiya is on his way with the tablets with letters of dadiya and ennam-aššur. a letter of the girl here in which she wrote: 'why did you the tablet? you ... go and ... talk with him!' i wrote you three months ago asking, send me [silver]! please, my father, send me [] two minas with the next caravan, lest your packet (of tin) is opened and you get angry. we have incurred a terribly heavy road-tax"."
to ennam-aššur from anna-anna: the missive that i dispatched with the servants must not be lost. return it. in it is noted the silver i spent. 1 pair of two pairs of boots, 1 belt, 3 pairs of -shoes, 2 scarves, a first-class horn (of oil) ... 15 logs of plane tree and -wood - all this i sent to you with my servants. as for itūr-ilī, his journey to the city is getting close. send me word whether there are any bundles in his house and make up your mind. i wrote to you, saying: since the servants have entered there is no one to assist me." urgent, the very day you hear my letter, seal 5 minas of silver and let one servant bring it under your seal. here the natives keep demanding (silver) at interest from me. enna-suen lives in hurama. ali-ahum, your brother, is ready to separate (him) from you. send word with good news to amur-ištar."
as to the 1 mina of silver that zukuwa sent me, i broke his seal with puzur-ennam as witness and checked it, and 2.5 shekels of silver were missing.
7 minas of good copper, 2.5 shekels of silver for ..., 2 shekels of silver for small goods - all this i gave to ...
173 -textiles (that) came down from the palace, 7 textiles as wrapping, 1 textile of my temple-fund, is what šalim-ahum's son brought me. i added 10 textiles that i took out of the strong room (and) 6 textiles that aššur-mūtappil brought me. in all 19[7 textiles]. thereof: 7 kutānu-textiles lamassutum took, 3 textiles šu-kūbum took, 3 textiles of the working capital of puzur-anna, 3 textiles of the working capital of aššur-bāni, 2 textiles aššur-mūtappil took. the rest of the textiles: 180 pieces.
to ennam-aššur from ibnī-adad: with respect to your silver, the 2 minas that i owe to you, do not worry about a single month('s delay). before i leave and clear my textiles and also stand by the lady, then i shall have your silver delivered directly to your person. because of this silver i have been delayed here. check(?) the tablet and then send me word with the first transport about what is here, so i can give it. ...
from ennnam-ištar to ennam-aššur: in your presence in burušhaddum i gave 10 shekels of silver to aššur-ṭāb. in kanesh i gave him a single -textile. i seized him for 2 shekels of silver, but once or twice he answered: your son received it." send me word whether or not you have received the silver. also in your presence, did i not leave a slave-girl to bēlum-bāni? 10 shekels of silver remain unpaid. seize him and have him pay the silver. from nahištum to ennam-aššur: kudātum brings you a thin textile. sell it profitably for me in silver. the proceeds from the thin textile you, ali-ahum and lamassī should not claim in the context of the will of your father as long as lamassī is alive. aššur-ṭāb brought you 1 -textile and a single belt."
1 talent of good acorns from hanaknak,
... ... ... ... in [... ... ... ... ... ... ..., when pn] comes i will buy [... ... ... ...] and send (him) to you with the first opportunity.
from kudātum and man-mahir to ennam-aššur: mannum-kī-aššur son of ahu-waqar brings you 1 mina of silver from daraši and ilī-iddina, the price of donkeys, under their seals. have them pay the silver there to you and then give them their tablet.
from šu-hubur to ali-ahum and abiya: 20.6666 minas of tin, thereof 3 blocks ... their weight was 15 minas. nothing was cut off. also one ingot of 4.6666 minas was sealed by my seal. on behalf of aha'i they bring the rest. ... gathered it but i did not seal it. šamaš-taklāku and ennam-aššur bring it to you. i promised them 5 shekels as wages. when they give you the tin, you then give them the silver. within two days i shall be there.
to ennānum and ali-ahum; specifically to ali-ahum from bēlum-bāni: concerning the 18 shekels of silver which šamaš-ennam brought to you for kukkulānum and kutaya - further, 1.5 shekel for his sacrifice - in all, 0.3333 minas less 0.5 shekel of silver. do not send him any silver. make purchases and give them to šamaš-ennam so he may bring it. send me word how much silver alulaya's representatives paid you. as to my tablet which kulumaya holds, if you have recovered it, then split (the envelope), seal it (again) and send it.
to ennam-aššur, dadiya, hinnāya, iddin-abum, akūa and ataya, say, thus elamma: as for your merchandise, tin and textiles, which ilī-ālum brought here, when we had reached an agreement and i had taken the tin and textiles, i was authorized, if the colony levied the the -tax, to take it from iliya's silver, that of his joint-stock fund (managed by?) la-qēp. i have in my possession a valid record of yours (to that effect). here i turned to the colony and i declared: 'the merchandise belongs to me, why have you levied -tax?' they answered: 'the merchandise has been joined to that of iliya and therefore we levied it.' i said: 'i am ready to swear that the merchandise is truly mine!' but, wherever they collected the tax for the colony they have not obliged me. they took 36 minas of tin from which i deducted 6 minas that were for kūn-ilum's account. please, my brothers, send me [with the first opportunity] 30 minas of tin, as much as amounts to its road-tax, its underweight and the import-tax on it, so that i do not have to take it from your silver here. why must i write you time and again, while you refuse to send it?""
seal of šu-bēlum, seal of aššur-idī, (confirming) that elamma seized šu-ištar when he was about to go on a journey and that elamma said to him: 12 minas and 37.5 shekels of refined silver you must send me when you enter wahšušana. and what (is due) for the remainder of my tin you must send me when you enter burušhattum. if you fail to do so, ... for refined copper shall i take your ...?" [šu-iš]tar answered: "take it"."
seal of aššur-bēl-awātim, seal of zuba, seal of iddin-ištar, son of [aššur-mālik, seal of ennam-aššur, son of aššur-šamšī, seal of abu-šalim, son of aššur-bēl-awātim.28 shekels of refined silver abu-šalim, son of aššur-bēl-awātim, owes to ennam-suen.from the week of the official who took over from aššur-mālik,and ennam-suen, month iv, eponymy of the successor of aššur-nādā, son of puzur-anna, he will pay 8 shekelswithin 3 weeks, 10 shekels within 6 weeks he will pay, and 10 shekels he will pay later, within another 10 weeks. if he does not pay when his term is over he will add interest per month in accordance with the regulation of the colony. the silver istemple fund of aššur.
to ali-ahum from amur-šarrassa: here aguwa, tu... and šuhurpiya have seized aššur-imittī son of ikūn-pī-ištar and they said: ... aššur-imittī to ali-ahum ..." ... aššur-imittī and aššur-imittī's slave answered: "i personally keep answering their words. send word as soon as possible, and ... and write to ... the slave ... instruct (him) about my orders." write a final report with šēp-ištar, so they do not frighten (anyone)."
seal of kukuwa and seal of šu-ištar; to ennam-aššur.
thus elamma, say to aššur-ṭāb: it was here that i gave you the following instruction: 'send me every mina of silver as soon as you find it. all the silver you have already available you must retain .' 6.3333 heavy textiles, of good quality, of šubarean make, kūn-ilum is bringing you. get hold of a specialist from zilat and let him stretch their yarns and make them suitable for you for / as -garments, so that you can realize at least some silver. with the next shipment i will send you garments, thin textiles and šulupkian textiles. look out for - or -textiles over there that please you and let your report come to me. and let with every single caravan ... regularly come to me, so that at least some silver becomes available to me.""
to abī-baštī, mannumma, bēliya and ennam-aššur from ennam-aššur and anna-anna; specifically to abī-baštī: 2 leather bags of two talents each, and 9 leather bags of one talent each, in all 11 leather bags of (in all) 13 talents. the washed copper had been packed, and my maid anna-anna entrusted it to you (fem.) under her seal. moreover, later they brought you one leather bag under my seal. also, the 45 minas of good copper that ababa gave me i left under my seal for ennam-aššur. here she has been paid its price in silver. we left my copper, 14 talents 45.5 minas in 13 leather bags, under our seals, for abī-baštī and your son ennam-aššur. until our message is answered - my dear brothers - the very day my servants enter, you must check the copper and they should place the copper in the bags in front of you, and my servants should bring it to abī-baštī under your seals. also, let them take away the . they should not spend one night. take care and send them!
to enah-ilī, šu-aššur and ennam-aššur from man-mahir and šukkutum: as to the 2 minas 15 shekels of silver that šukkutum owes to the merchant, according to his certified tablet - ennam-aššur brings you the silver sealed by šukkutum. look at his debt-note and write two open memoranda about how much his terms are in arrears, and enah-ilī should keep one while šu-aššur should keep the other. when šukkutum meets with the merchant, the merchant may, if he wishes to do so, charge interest from šukkutum in accordance with how much his terms are overdue. if he does not charge interest he will do šukkutum a real favour. the representatives of the merchant should receive the silver, and šu-aššur and ennam-aššur must take šukkutum's debt-note.
total of your silver: 15 minas 10 shekels, ṣilliya brings you under our seal - both that from the tin and that from your textiles.
when elamma was about to set out on a journey pilah-aššur said to elamma: lā-qēp, the son of iliya, who belongs to you(r firm), offers me tin with a credit term of 70 weeks". elamma answered: "take my own tin and do me a favor by giving me (for it) not less than 8 shekels per (shekel of silver) in 20 weeks." pilah-aššur said: "[i will take] the tin at the rate of 8 shekels, but you, what will you [give me]?" elamma answered: "and i, when i return from the city i will give you 15 minas of silver. you will send it to the city and one will make (with it) purchases for you, it will be at your disposal." before [aššur's] dagger i gave my testimony. when elamma was about to set out on a journey pilah-aššur said: "i gave you 15 minas of refined silver, its excise added, its transport fee paid for. when you enter the city you must buy for me 1 talent of tin and for the rest of my silver buy textiles for me, send them to me with your next donkey transport." elamma answered: "i will send them to you". before aššur's dagger i gave my testimony."
seal of šu-nūnu son of amur-ištar, seal of zikiki son of aššur-rē'ī, seal of abu-šalim son of puzur-ištar. abu-šalim owes 6 shekels of refined silver to irišum. he will pay at the shearing. if he has not paid, he will add 1 / 6 shekel per month.
seal of aššur-emūqī, seal of ennam-aššur s. of menaya, seal of iddin-abum. concerning iddin-abum's debt of 13.3333 minas of refined silver. his term has expired. concerning amur-ištar.
to issu-arik from šalim-aššur: ilī-bāni brought you 15 minas of refined silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, (the proceeds) from your goods transported by pūšu-kēn. your tin that irišum and abu-šalim conducted here, ... wagonsin accordance with your orders they will bring it into burušhaddum, and 10 shekels of silver, the consignment of ennam-aššur ... of the girl, your daughter i shall have conducted to you together with my deposits and then i shall clear your goods.
from man-mahir to ennam-aššur: as to the tin you sent me, alulaya and amur-ištar ... 15.5 minas of tin. the proceeds of your tin, 2 minas 12.5 shekels of silver. šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī are bringing that to you under my seal. also, now ali-ahum wrote to me, saying: if any of what my father gave to you remains in your possession, do not release it to my brother. if you release it, then i and my sister will sue you in the matter."also, his representatives have set witnesses against me."
to ali-ahum and annina from aššur-malik: uṣur-ša-aššur son of atata brings you 8.6666 minas of silver under my seal. the silver should remain with ali-ahum until i arrive.
... an arzālu, a qablītu worth 1 mina of silver, a textile ... they should bring to them.
when aššur-nādā was about to leave on a journey aššur-nādā, son of ah-šalim, and abī-ilī settled accounts as follows: when he comes up from the city aššur-nādā will give 15 minas of tin to abī-ilī, who will pay him not less than 2 minas of silver abī-ilī does not owe anything to aššur-nādā. in the presence of ennam-suen, son of aššur-ṭāb. for these words the wahšušana colony gave us and before aššur's dagger i gave the tablet with my testimony. ṣilli-ištar was my fellow witness.
seal of lāqēpum, son of iliya; seal of amur-šamaš, son of mīšu(r)-rabi; seal of ezē, son of šarrum-kēn; seal of galdaya, (witnessing) that elamma and galdaya settled accounts with the result that after both travel expenses and his food allowance have been deducted, elamma (still) has a claim of 1 mina of refined silver on galdaya, the son of naku. from the week of amriya and ikūnum he will add 1.5 shekel per mina per month. month vii, year-eponymy of abiya, son of šu-dagan. separately, there still exists a valid record of his working capital. we made them swear an oath by the city for these words.
to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur; seal of zukuwa son of aššūr-idī.
ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya and pay the silver to mannum-kī-aššur or to mannum-kī-aššur's representatives, and as to the 20 talents of wool and the -stone that mannum-kī-aššur holds as security, when you pay the silver let him identify mannum-kī-iliya's seal in case the security is sealed, and then take out the tablet of the 3 minas of silver and its interest, and seal this tablet and the -stone and entrust it to ištar-lamassī. also, when the silver is paid set witnesses to prove that the wool is mine. also, check the wool for šalim-wardī and mannum-kī-iliya, and set witnesses for them about how much wool is cleared, stating that the wool and 7 donkeys belong to ennam-aššur. seal the wool and entrust it under your seals together with my other goods so they may conduct it here. šalim-wardī shall do for them what we instructed him to there.
ennam-aššur questioned ali-ahum, and ennam-aššur said as follows to ali-ahum: now here i have shown you the missive sealed by you in front of 3 witnesses, and you have confirmed it and we have entrusted it to them. now, may these men listen - confirm or deny our memorandum with my seal and your seal, that you and i settled accounts and settled. do not obstruct me!" ali-ahum answered ennam-aššur, saying: "it is the memoranda with your seal and my seal. come on, let us seize three men and let us settle in accordance with the memoranda that are sealed with our seals. as much silver as our father set down as owed by me and by you, and concerning which our father left a tablet and our father's investors held the tablet, which they deposited before the plenary assembly of the colony, and which the colony entrusted it to an attorney - come on, even today let us agree how much silver we are booked for in that tablet, let us seal it in accordance with the verdict of the city, and let us go to the city. let us not obstruct the tablet from the city and the attorney." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by enna-suen, by šar-adad, by ilī-bāni."
10 shekels of refined silver is owed by ikūn-pī-aššur son of puzur-ištar.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: in accordance with your missives that you gave me we assisted your sister, confronted the city assembly and according to the tablet of the city that we received, šalim-aššur's daughter will take an attorney, stating that both the silver, the tablets and the tablet of šalim-aššur that the investors entrusted to iliya in durhumit concerning the debt of ennam-aššur and ali-ahum - in accordance with this tablet that šalim-aššur wrote, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum must pay the silver, give it to the attorney and the silver should go to the city - now, copies of the second tablet (exist) and we have seized the attorney ababa for you with me as witness. he among you who says as follows: i shall pay the silver, he will assist the attorney, and he shall make the one who has not paid pay. your representatives turned to me and said: the man is your colleague. pay silver for the hire of the attorney." since the matter is indeed yours i paid 0.3333 mina 5 shekels of silver on my own to your representatives and the attorney. my dear brother, send to me personally 0.5 mina of silver with the first express caravan. since my goods have left hahhum, the narrow track ..."
15 shekels of silver its excise added, his transport fee paid, under my seal i entrusted to adad-pilah, son of anīnum. in the presence of šukutum (and) of aššur-mālik, son of šabahānum.
seal of ali-abum son of ṣuliya, seal of kiliya son of ennānum. tablet from before aššur's dagger. the durhumit colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony.
x minas of good copper: abum-ilī; 4 minas of good copper: šamaš-bāni; 2 minas of good copper: ikūnum's son; 2 shekels of silver: iddin-abum son of ...;
say to elamma, thus puzur-anna: i have no father and lord but you! don't be angry because i did not turn up with you. i cannot travel to make purchases (for you), i must travel for an order of our paternal house. i thought: 'he might detain me and force me to carry a load (for him)' (and) for that reason i did not turn up with you. but with your next lot of merchandise i will ...""
amur-ištar son of damuma has received 10 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-imittī son of dudiki, by tūr-aššur son of uzuwa, by enna-suen.
sealed by uraya son of manana, by ilī-dan son of iddin-aššur, by mannum-balum-aššur son of ibkum. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
from pilah-ištar to ennam-aššur: concerning the merchant's silver for which you made me guarantee here to alulaya, alulaya later went on a trip after you. 45 days ago the silver arrived and is ready. if you are delayed, send word and i shall pay the silver where you write. otherwise let me set it aside for my own needs. the silver should not be idle.
thus puzur-anna and aššur-rabi, say to šu-bēlum: as soon as you had gone, after your departure, the 1 mina 23 shekels of fine quality -gold in the shape of rings, which you had spotted, aššur-mālik, son of erraya, and adad-ṣulūlī have shipped to you, to kanesh. in their name itūr-ilī took [0.3333?] mina 2 shekels of [gold?]. when the colonial office took steps to make you come back, we appealed to them and deposited 18 shekels of silver, the šaddu'tu-tax you owe. 13.5 shekels of gold at a rate of 8 shekels to 1 (yields) as price of the gold 1 mina 36.5 shekels (of silver), it is my gold and the rest of your gold, 45.5 shekels of ld, is with aššur-rabi. peace reigns here. write to [pn], that he may bring his ... ... to kanesh or send it to you over there. by no means send 30 minas of tin to itūr-ilī!""
for the costs of upbringing, the food and the tomb of the daughters of kapsiya, for the tin, the venture credit of the daughter of hanana, hanana's wife and sons will not raise claims against kapsiya for anything they have given to kapsiya, wife of ali-abum. and kapsiya, wife of ali-abum, for a silver debt of 1 mina and 7 shekels owed by pilah-istar, son of assur-re'i, for 22.5 shekels of silver of the anatolian of ..., and for the debt owed by harimtum - kapsiya, wife of ali-abum will not raise claims against hudida and the sons of hanana. if, apart from the 15 shekels, which nakile'ed has to confirm, hanana proves to have an additional claim in silver on nakile'ed, kapsiya will have a claim on her (hudida) for the (figurines of the) gods. in the presence of assur-lamassi, son of su-kubum, of ennanum, of ubaya, of sumi-abiya, and of amur-samas.
10 minas of silver including its interest he received from our own enna-suen.
to ali-ahum and damqaya from puzur-aššur: 0.5 mina of silver (belonging to) šu-suen son of aššur-nādā, (grand)son of irnuid, ... has received the silver from šu-suen under the seal of my representative. ... he paid to them ... he should give to you. x mina 1 shekel of silver adida should give to you. ali-ahum should receive all this silver. uku brought you x minas of tin. why has word concerning this not come here from you? to damqaya: ...
i paid 6.5 shekels of silver aluwa's fees; 9 shekels of silver when(?) nab-suen left the donkeys in hurrama -all this man-mahir paid.
seal of aššur-idī, seal of ennam-aššur, seal of ennam-aššur. concerning ennam-aššur's debt. ennam-aššur owes 0.6666 mina 5 shekels of tin to luzi. reckoned from the week of itūr-ilī and puzur-šadu'e he must pay in one month. if he has not paid, he will add (interest) at the rate 3 shekels per mina. month kuzallu, eponymy šamaš-bāni.
from iddin-abum to šumma-libbi-aššur and ennam-aššur: 1 mina 2 shekels of -silver, with exudations, šumma-libbi-aššur brings under my seal. let šumma-libbi-aššur add 1 mina of refined silver to the one mina of silver there, seal 2 minas of silver and give them to the first travellers so they may bring them to kulumaya. set silver ... two ... for ... to šumma-libbi-aššur: give 1 mina of silver of your own and take interest for a single month. if no silver has fallen into your hands, then take some at interest from a merchant-house. i shall pay interest for a single month until i arrive. my dear brothers, take care to send the silver. let me not have to face kulumaya's anger.
thus iliya, aššur-rēṣī, ennam-aššur and dadiya, say to elamma: 48 shekels of silver, which is silver of ali-ahum that is part of your joint-stock fund, we took it and made purchases with it and kunnaya has sent them to you. (as for) the 1 mina of gold you yourself have invested with ali-ahum, we collected 1.6666 mina of silver and made purchases and aššur-lamassī has brought them to you. 0.3333 mina of silver of the price of the donkeys you sent to ali-ahum has been added to your merchandise; ennam-aššur and šu-ištar, son of dadānum, have shipped it off to you. we collected 20 minas of copper from ilī-bāni and 8 minas of copper from ahmaya and we bought (with it) dark textiles; ennam-aššur and šu-ištar, son of dadānum, have brought it to you. as for the silver of the paternal house that is (in) the joint-stock capital of ali-ahum, about which you wrote - aššur-ṭāb took your and ali-ahum's part (and) he made purchases (with it) and shipped them off. we ourselves did not receive / take anything."
to šalim-aššur from iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, ..., enah-ilī and ennam-aššur: we entered your house, opened for your tablets, took out the tablet concerning the debt of uṣur-ša-aššur son of aššur-malik and aššur-ṭāb son of sadaya, and entrusted it to abuwa. now, listen to the copy: sealed by puzur-ti'amtum, by aššur-imittī son of etaya, by uṣur-ša-aššur, by adada, the scribe, and by aššur-ṭāb. concerning the fact that uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb owe 4 minas of refined silver to šalim-aššur. reckoned from the week of mannu-kī-aššur and ikūnum they must pay within 6 weeks. if they have not paid (in time) they will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. they are jointly responsible for the silver." also, listen to the missives ... and ... of the city and the tablet concerning 4 minas of silver concerning uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb we took out of your house. and concerning ... nothing is indicated. ... of the debt of aššur-idī son of sadaya - indeed, you have witnesses against uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb ... that they themselves have set witnesses - the witnesses to aššur-idī's debt, indicate their names in your message so we ... against aššur-ṭāb ... whom they chose for service as messenger ... of his tablet that he ... before aššur-... the tin and textiles of the tablet witnessed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by ṣilulu son of uku, by aššur-malik son of ali-ahum and by adada, the scribe, he ... and aššur-... made precisely us representatives, and those goods have entered burušhaddum together with his goods, transported by mannum-..., and he produced 30 minas of silver and we paid within x weeks. ... on top of ... 26 minas of silver from aššur-imittī's transport ... we paid. (to determine) whether he has written a tablet about the rest of the silver concerning uṣur-ša-aššur, we made these witnesses approach and amurrum-bāni and aššur-malik opened their mouths and said: "since ... that has not been indicated for the names of the witnesses, therefore ..." there ṣilulu ... his missive and ... to the men ... 6 talents ... that you gave before them. and if you have ... against these men and the earlier men, then confront the city assembly and get a tablet from the city so we can obtain their testimony in the gate of the god. we sent you adiya. ...the servants we have not ..."
to šu-aššur, mannu-kī-abiya and ilī-pī-uṣur, say, thus abu-šalim: 1 mina of silver and 4.5 shekels of full ? gold mannu-kī-abiya is bringing to you. please, my brothers, buy on the very day mannu-kī-abiya arrives in town -textiles and send them to me with the first opportunity. say to šu-anum: 'make the equivalent of the yield of the gold available by buying -textiles for me'. you yourself must take your silver from the yield of the gold. do me this favor and (know that) i too can do you a favor! if the maid asks ... ... ... ... from you, give it her and let a report from you come here then i will send you the silver (for it).""
8 minas of refined siler - its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for - silver belonging to a merchant - bēliya son of ilī-kurub gave that on behalf of the merchant to lā-qēp son of šu-aššur; out of that lā-qēp must bring up from the city to kanesh for 1 mina of silver, a purchase of good akkadian textiles, for the rest, 7 minas of silver, extra-fine -textiles from 12 shekels of silver per piece or less, and lā-qēp son of šu-aššur must give the textiles to the merchant. from here and from there (the shipment) goes overland in the name of the merchant together with lā-qēp's own orders. witnessed by ṭāb-ahi son of irbi-adad, by lā-qēp son of puzur-šadue, by ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur.
x belonging to anna-anna, 1 dress (and) 1 thin textile i gave to abu-šalim son of ṣill-adad. witnessed by mannum-kī-aššur, by kuziziya.
1.5 shekel of silver, underweight, i added in the name of azu the brother-in-law of aluwa.
to ennam-aššur from anna-anna: 2 textiles lā-qēp ... 1 mina 10 shekels ... extra i received. 1 mina ... hatahšu ... silver ... a robe ... i received. 12 shekels ... kikaršan ... of the silver ... 0.6666 mina ... in accordance with your message we gave to ... the maid ... 10 shekels ... i paid ... their tablets ... i paid ... silver for 8 ... 1.5 shekel of silver for the clothes of e... i paid. 1 shekel of silver for two ...; 2 shekels ...; 1.5 shekel for small goods; 2.6666 shekels for ... and of the fibula ... 0.3333 shekel for straw ... the silver that i have received of ... of your share ... 1 mina of silver ... after your message arrived ... i received from kuššara and ... in the month ... that we owe 1.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver; send the silver as soon as possible so i can pay to kuššara. the interest must not increase.
a tablet about 10 shekels of silver of abiya, son of uzua; a tablet about 21 shekels of silver of peruʾahšu and elālī, son of šalim-aššur; a tablet with the seal of uṣur-ša / i-ištar, son of dadaya, that he will not seek a vindication against me and aššur-bāni; a tablet with a sworn deposition of puzur-aššur concerning the slave šamaš-rēʾī; a tablet with the seal of urdum, on of aššur-imittī, that he will not seek a vindication against puzur-aššur and asānum; a tablet about 0.5 mina of silver, with the seal of puzur-ištar, son of ali-abum, concerning the purchase price of šamaš-tappāʾī. in all six tablets, placed in the
seal of atata son of šalim-aššur, seal of lā-qēp son of aššur-idī, seal of ennam-aššur, huraṣānum's slave. ennam-aššur owes 5 shekels of silver to luzi. ennam-aššur must bring up one -textile worth 5 shekels of silver within one year. if he has not brought up a within a year, he must pay 10 shekels of silver here. month te'inātum, eponymy elālī, the high priest.
for 5 sacks, both barley and wheat, which the lady delivered, ali-ahum received 1 mina of silver.
1.5 shekel of silver for pūšu-kēn;
concerning 2 minas 10 shekels of silver that we owed to šalim-aššur, of that: 0.5 mina: uraya, 0.5 mina: amur-ištar, 28 1 / 4 shekels: aššur-taklāku son of šu-illil, 12 minus 1 / 4 shekels: ikūnum, 0.5 mina: aššur-taklāku.
say to my representatives: "here assur-taklaku should make a statement and then make him pay x mina minus 1 shekel of silver. have no consideration with him!"
šalim-aššur son of issu-arik and aššuwan(zi) son of harša, for whom the king and the rabi sikkitim had given a verdict, stating that they should give a servant of šalim-aššur to the river ordeal - šalim-aššur and aššuwan reached an agreement and they swore an oath by anna, aššur, the king, the rabi sikkitim wališra and by the colleagues who settled their affair, so that šalim-aššur gave 1 min of silver and 1 kutānu-textile to aššuwan, and aššuwan and his brothers, sons of harša, will not raise claim against šalim-aššur, his sons and iddin-abum's sons for anything whatsoever. if they raise claim, it is an evil against anna, aššur, the king and the rabi sikkitim. seal of kurašmiš son of the chief of smiths, seal of bulina son of the chief cupbearer, seal of šezur son of kazuba, seal of ašuwan son of harša, seal of azu son of kazu, seal of uraya and the seal of amurrum-bāni, sons of manana, seal of zuba son of ištar-pālil, seal of adad-ellat son of adad-bāni.
to ennānum, kukuwa, man-mahir and hadītum from ennam-aššur; specifically to hadītum: earlier i sent word to you with man-mahir, saying: the grain that i released on terms to the ladies for 2 minas of silver ... and which ... for you and ša..., the silver, the price of the grain ...to me." ... i ... both once and twice ...the silver ... give to lā-qēpum ... and ... let it remain apart until the journey. do not alienate me when i arrive. also, the grain from the man from tumliya and from ušhata's son ... in the second ... it should remain ... to kukuwa from ennam-aššur: the price of ... your tablet ... terms ... šu-bēlum said: "your term is up. have him pay the silver." 0.5 mina of silver, the proceeds from the sale of my textiles is in waldi-ilum's possession, so seize him and make him pay. demand 25 sacks of wheat from karšini, and let them be kept in ennānum's house."
seal of aššur-malik son of zuwa; seal of ga... ašuan and abuna, your slaves, owe 7.5 shekels of silver.
thus ennam-aššur and dadiya, say to elamma: here we entrusted your goods to ah-šalim in the city-gate, when he was about to leave, after the caravan had already, aššur-idī came and aššur-idī seized ah-šalim for 4 minas of silver, declaring: 'i will not let you go!'. out of consideration for the merchandise, in order not let the goods be brought back, we, i and dadiya, had ourselves booked as his guarantors for the 4 minas of silver. take care to ask ah-šalim for the silver, saying: "my representatives let themselves be booked as your guarantors. pay the silver then i will send it to the gentlemen, so that they can pay it to aššur-idī. my representatives [" if] he has fled, write to us, then we will sell his house here."
šalim-aššur seized us in his case against the sons of iddin-abum and šalim-aššur said: do you contest the tablet from the city assembly that the attorney brought as well as the testament according to which 7 investors concluded our case?" iddin-abum's sons answered, all three of them: "we do not contest anything against you." šu-bēlum said: "i sue you for the goods from aššur-bēl-awātim's house." his brothers said "as for us, we have no claims against you." šalim-aššur said "keep in mind what has been sworn by an oath by the city, since he (now) raises claim in a concluded case!" šu-bēlum answered: "have you paid in full ... of my brothers, the silver and its interest?" šalim-aššur said: "i have paid in ashes(?) and light." witnessed by puzur-šadu'e, by illil-bāni, by aššur-rabi. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we have our testimony. "
seal of huluba, seal of šarnigaššu,
from šalim-aššur to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: concerning the matter of hannaya that you wrote me about, make him swear by aššur's dagger - let him swear that after i gave him silver for an investment he has not achieved anything else apart from the silver he offers to you, and then take the silver he offers to you. also, concerning the matter of aššur-imittī, in the city ... happiānum ... ilī-ašrannī ... the son ... of your textiles ... aššur-imittī ...
in sum[mer they will ... ... ... ... ... ... ...], at anna's festival they will pay the silver. they will weigh it out by our weight, in the correct amount.
šalim-aššur and šu-bēlum seized us and šu-bēlum said to šalim-aššur: you are my father, i have come to conclude your case about everything relating to my paternal house. give me what silver there is to give before my brothers." šalim-aššur answered: "you will indeed receive 15 minas of silver before your brothers." "now, buzuwa is my guarantor." šalim-aššur continued: "at the conclusion of the matter who will you have sit down on your behalf?" šu-bēlum answered: "i shall have buzuwa and agiya sit down for me. the silver that you will give me before my brothers, those two will deduct that silver for you." šalim-aššur said: "and if indeed you have not had buzuwa and agiya sit down when the case is concluded?" šu-bēlum answered: "if i have not had buzuwa and agiya sit down at the conclusion of the case, you shall not give me anything for the 5 minas of silver that buzuwa balanced for me." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ennānum, by agiya; adad-rabi son of buzi was our (absent) partner. "
say to elamma, thus ahu-waqar and aššuriš-tikal: here we seized šu-bēlum and we made him listen to the tablet, a copy, of lā-qēp and we said to him: 'give your testimony!' he answered: 'some time ago i already gave my testimony to pilah-aššur (that) no promise has been made to deliver the silver to the city'. we entered and listened to (the text of) the copies of his testimony drawn up in the gate of the god, that he had given to pilah-aššur (and they read): 'lā-qēp was my companion'. here is my copy, listen to it; it is up to you there (what to do)'. here we questioned ibni-ilī, son of aššur-šamšī, about his record and we also questioned his friends, kūn-ilum and iddin-ištar, and the result was: the man is reliable and has a (good) record. let your instruction come to me whether the girl must be given or not."
to ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur; sealed by anna-anna.
seal of luzina, seal of aššur-ṭāb, of the debt of aššur-bāni, son of sukkuku. he will pay 0.6666 mina of silver at the agreed time. if he does not pay per mina 0.3333 mina will amount for him (and) hinnāya will sue him for 1 mina of silver. month v, eponymy of iphurum.
4 minas 3.83333 shekels of refined silver idnāya owes to elamma. from the week of šukutum and urāya he will add as interest 1 1 / 4 shekel per mina per month. in the presence of ilabrat-bāni, of ibni-ilī.
if šalim-ašsur's investors raise claim against ennānum concerning tin ... textiles belonging to ennānum concerning tin ... textiles belonging to ennānum ... and ennam-aššur, then ennam-aššur will release ennānum son of amriya with šalim-aššur's investors for as much tin and ordinary textiles as they clear at the gate of the god. witnessed by turaya, by lā-qēp.
aššur-malik son of tahazira owes 0.3333 mina of refined (silver) to ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of lulu. he will pay the silver in 2 months. if he has not paid (in time) he will pay interest at the rate 1 shekel of silver per month. month te'inātum, eponymy dan-ea son of abu-waqar. a copy of this note with your witnesses: witnessed by aššur-imittī son of amur-aššur, by aššur-muttabbil son of ennam-aššur, by mannum-balum-aššur son of ikūnum. to aššur-muttabbil: if he has not paid the silver, then you must ... the missives.
ṭab-ṣilli-aššur seized šu-suen by his hem whereupon šu-suen said: why are you holding me?" ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur answered: "for the expenses i hold you!" šu-suen declared: "i surely retain what is stated with an oath by the city, that he holds me although i do not owe him anything!" in the presence of ennam-suen, son of aššur-ṭāb, in the presence of ennam-suen, son of aššur-ṭāb, of abu-šalim, son of aššur-bēl-awātim."
as to the 1 talent 17 minas of copper and 0.5 mina of silver, my earnings which i left with aššur-nādā and uzuwa — aššur-nādā took 25 minas of copper; ali-ahum, "shorty", took 10 minas. the remainder is with them. i left 6 minas of copper, the price of rations, with uzuwa.
1 mina 15 shekels of silver is owed by šariša, the miller. he will pay 0.6666 minas 5 shekels of silver now. 0.5 mina of silver he will pay at the festival of usmû.
5 shekels of silver from the price of 2 sheep is owed by puzur-ennam.
to adida and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: the day abaya arrives you must not let my donkeys and servants rest - send them! let the silver, the price of 1 textile and the copper stay. sell a couple of textiles and send me 1.5 mina with abaya for me to dispose over. it is on the narrow track that i have left. my dear lords, as to the silver that i to ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, pay when pn arrives. if you have not sold the former textiles, either the tin ... for my expenses for the narrow track ...
... ... ... ... dān-aššur ... ... ... [x] mina(s) 1 shekel of silver [for ...]-aššur, son of šalim-a[... ...]; [x+]5 minas of copper by the local weight; 1 shekel of silver for uṣur-ša-aššur, son of damuma; 195 minas of copper for lullu. all this aššur-šamšī paid for the debt of aššur-ṭāb. separately he bought for 17 shekels of silver dress-pins; 0.5 ... ... ... ... aššur-šamšī ... ... ... ... gave to aššur-ṭāb. separately 2.5 minas of silver under the seals of aššur-šamšī aššur-ṭāb entrusted to ali-ahum. of the silver he paid [x+]2.6666 minas of silver are [with] ali-abum, son of manua, [x] minas with panaka. [x+]5 minas of copper, the price of wine [for?] the official, 31.5 minas, [price of] wine and ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... are with the son of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... copper with ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... puzur-aššur, ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...-šalim, son of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... puzur-ištar, son of ... ... ... ... son of elamma, hinnāya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
5 minas of tin and 0.6666 minas of silver is owed by iddin-abum. he also (owes for) the food for a trip from hahhum to kanesh. ...witnessed by aššur-šamšī.
... son of kumdānum owes 1 mina of refined silver to the merchant. witnessed by ikūnum son of u..., by aššur-nādā son of ... month allanātum, eponymy aššur-damiq. ... reckoned from the week of ušihatum ... al-ahum of ... owes 0.3333 mina of silver to irišum. witnessed by ga..., by amriya, by ata... reckoned from the week of babilum and narām-sīn. puzur-ištar son of šu-anim owes 18 shekels of silver to irišum. witnessed by mušueni, by ataya. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī and amur-ištar. zuba owes 15 shekels of silver to irišum. witnessed by rimaši(?) son of šu-kūbum, by ... son of aššur-... 8 shekels of silver ... witnessed by šu-nūnu, by šu-kūbum. abu-šalim owes ... to irišum. month qarra'ātum, eponymy ... witnessed by šu-nūnu son of a..., by zi... son of aššur-nīšu.
10 minas of refined silver, on which a claim rests, is owed by asanum, his servant, to kuliya son of ali-abum. he will pay the silver in one year. month viii, eponymy of ennam-suen, son of iddin-abum.
to iddin-kūbum, anah-ilī, and puzur-aššur, especially to anah-ilī, thus says kuliya: 'you owe to abu-šalim, son of ennam-suen, 1.3333 mina of silver plus its accumulated interest. a letter of aššur-ṭāb arrived here and for an amount of 1 mina of silver your affair has been settled. i myself have guaranteed that amount of silver. moreover, you have 0.3333 mina of silver to our father in the gate of the god. i drew up your tablet for a total of 1.3333 mina of silver; you have in your possession a letter with my seal (good) for 1 mina of silver and a second (good) for 0.3333 mina of silver. you told me as follows: go and obtain for me a tablet sealed by aššur-ṭāb, and i obtained for you a tablet sealed by aššur-ṭāb stating that neither his father nor he himself will come back on you and your sons. please, my brother, put 1.3333 mina of silver under seal and entrust it to puzur-aššur to bring it here. send me a message then i will give both the tablet sealed by aššur-ṭāb and the one of 1.3333 mina of silver with your own seal to your representatives. and then they should release to me the two letters of mine with my seal, which you have in possession, to cancel them. my dear brother, it is now two years that you keep this silver at your disposal. though i sent my servants to you, you did not send me the silver and they caused me expenses of six shekels of silver. please, my brother, send the silver and give the 6 shekels of silver, the expenses he incurred, to puzur-aššur. realize what my favors to you mean!
thus bēlānum, say to ennam-aššur, iddin-aššur and pilah-ištar: as for the 2 talents of tin, 4 textiles of fine quality, 3 of current quality, and a black donkey, which pilah-ištar will bring down from hahhum - if a rate of 8 : 1 is possible, sell the tin for silver and let your report come to me. if a rate of 8 : 1 against silver is impossible do not sell it for silver. one must not ship the tin on via šalahšuwa. for the safety of the tin one must ship the tin on via timilkiya to durhumit. if people from kuburnat are staying there let the tin be ? and put small packets for / as ... ... here and there inside the wool and the hides and so ship them on. [sell it?] for silver to [... ... ...].""
15.3333 shekels of silver, the price of copper, is owed by kullu son of aššur-malik.
i paid 1.3333 mina of silver from the week of kurub-ištar son of puzur-ilī on behalf of šu-ištar son of puzur-ilī on behalf of šu-ištar son of šukkutum to enna-suen son of šu-ištar.
the 12 shekels of silver that i have in my possession, thereof: 1 shekel silver i gave to lamassutum, 3 3 / 8 shekels are what šu-išhara owes as price of one . he entrusted it (for shipment) to me for the second time, but i have not yet obtained it. the silver that salibu owes we have not yet received.
say to kuliya, hanunu, usur-sa-assur, (and) assur-lamassi, (in particular) to usur-sa-assur, thus pilah-istar: "27 shekels of silver of assur, of the strong room and the house(s), i gave you four years ago. you (then) said: 'i will turn to my brother in mamma who is carrying 3 minas of silver, and i will send you your silver. moreover, i will send to you, to nenassa every (possible) shekel of silver'. now, realize well that since four years you use the silver of assur for trading purposes and that you have kept me waiting until this very day! get hold of the silver or what has been acquired with it during its journeys and give it to my representative(s). don't fail to give that silver lest you will regret it afterwards! as for the words you spoke, i too can listen to the words of colleagues and friends. you must comply(?) with what i said!".
over there no one of the share-holders representing the investors shall approach anything. according to the tablet of the city, (if he does) it will be considered as stolen by him.
to the address of .......... he brought ......... -textiles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... and separately 2 -textiles with my seals, soft ones? [and ... ... ... ...] ones, all this to / for aššur-ennam ... ...
from šalim-aššur to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: collect the silver, seal it with your seals and let it be placed in my house where it can be well guarded. 2 minas of silver from our account ...
10 minas ... ...
12 shekels of silver, which āl-ṭāb owes to kurub-suen and (for which) ennam-suen was guarantor, pilah-ištar collected that silver in the name of kurub-suen, ennam-suen paid it to him in the name of āl-ṭāb. if kurub-suen raises a claim (for it) for against al-ṭāb, pilah-ištar will clear him. he collected the silver during the eponymy of šudaya, in the month xi. witnessed by adad-ellat, by ir'am-aššur, son of idi-bāni.
from enah-ilī to ali-ahum: urgent! the very day you hear the letter you must set out and come. to your (plur.) father šalim-aššur ... what is present ... copper of good quality that he has personally ... deposit a memorandum before witnesses with specifications of the good copper, and set out and come here. also, i shall clear you here with the investors. you must not quarrel with each other ..., and the investors should not ... your women ...should not be lost ... you (plur.) must (not) act rashly ...
seal of ennam-aššur, son of ummassa. aššur-ṣulūlī, son of aššur-šād-ilī representing kuliya, son of ali-abum, seized us against aššur-emūqī, son of šu-rama, and aššur-ṣulūlī said as follows: the silver of bēlum-bāni, the agent of kuliya, did you take it, yes or no? deny or confirm before these men. aššur-emūqī said: i took it, yes i took it and today i would (again) take it! for this affair the plenary kanesh 'gave' me (as witness) and before aššur's dagger i gave my testimony. aššur-lamassī, son of itūr-anum, was my companion. seal of aššur-lamassī, son of itūr-anum. aššur-ṣululī, son of aššur-šād-ilē, who represents kuliya, son of ali-abum, seized us against aššur-emūqī, son of šu-rama, and aššur-ṣululī said to aššur-emūqī: did you take the silver of bēlum-bāni kuliya's agent, yes or no? deny or confirm it before these (witnesses)! aššur-emūqī answered: i took it, yes i took it and today i would (again) take (it)! for this affair the plenary of tegarama gave us and before aššur's dagger i gave my testimony. ennum-aššur, son of ummassa, was my companion. seal of ali-ahum, son of zumaya. aššur-ṣululī, son of aššur-šād-ilī, who represents kuliya, son of ali-abum, and aššur-emūqī, son of šu-rama, in kanesh, by mutual agreement seized us (as witnesses) and aššur-ṣululī said to aššur-emūqī: your brother bēlum-bāni owes a surety deposit to kuliya and in his contract it is marked as (due to) 'the creditor.' if i had not intervened, without my knowledge you would have made an agreement with the creditor(s) of your brother and taken the silver! but, wherever silver of bēlum-bāni [ is available, you shall take nothing! if you have made an agreement with bēlum-bāni's creditor(s) and have taken silver, or have taken anything wherever silver of bēlum-bāni is available, you shall pay all the silver he owes to kuliya. aššur-emūqī answered: if i have made an agreement with the creditor(s) of my brother bēlum-bāni and have taken silver, or have taken anything wherever silver of bēlum-bāni is available, i will pay all the silver that my brother bēlum-bāni owes to kuliya, son of ali-abum. for this affair the plenary durhumit gave me and before aššur's dagger i gave my testimony. aššur-nādā, son of madubaya was my companion. seal of pilah-ištar, son of aššur-nādā, seal of šu-bēlum, son of ali-ahum, seal of aššur-emūqī, son of šu-rama. 1 mina of silver, the price of 4(?) 0.5 minas of tin for which bēlānum, son of šu-kūbum, had become indebted to bēlum-bāni, son of šu-rama, and which upon return from kanesh he would pay - aššur-emūqī, his brother, son of šu-rama, has received that silver. if anybody comes back on belum-bani for that silver aššur-emūqī, son of šu-rama will clear him (of claims).
with regard to what goods had been entrusted to aššur-bēl-awātim and which šalim-aššur had taken out, if anyone raises claim against šu-kūbum, šalim-aššur will clear him. witnessed by aššur-malik son of ali-ahum, by aššur-imittī son of ikūn-pī-ištar, by enna-suen son of šu-ištar.
adad-bāni and ennam-suen settled accounts and ennam-suen will pay 48.5 minas of copper and adad-bāni will pay 31.5 minas of copper. witnessed by puzur-aššur.
to ennam-aššur, ikūnum son of elāli and amur-ištar son of ...; sealed by aššur-malik son of ikūn-pīya.
to šu-anum son of hadaya; sealed by sakliya.
to šalim-aššur from šalim-aššur: i sent you word twice about ilī-bāni son of yaya. since he keeps behaving in an evil manner a message from aššur-malik son of šu-ištar came from nahriya. he said: ilī-bāni has attacked me for 8 textiles." we counted the textiles for ilī-bāni and he himself counted them for aššur-malik. aššur-malik left one top-pack before his departure and ilī-bāni took that. he shall not attack the servant for anything. you are planning to go to the city. if you please, they should not formally state (it) there (...) they should come. they should clear the matter here and then take your silver where it appears."
2 talent 56.6666 minas of tin, including the loose tin, at 14 3 / 4 shekels per (shekel of silver), its price in silver: 11 minas 59.6666 shekels; 2.3333 minas of silver, the price of the textiles and the donkeys. in all 14 minas 19.6666 shekels of silver elamma weighed out to us.
enah-ilī, bēlānum, ah-šalim and lā-qēp seized us by joint agreement. on the day when enah-ilī, bēlānum and ah-šalim pay their shares of the silver of šu-aššur's pledge, then lā-qēp must also pay his share. witnessed by puzur-anna, by ali-ahum.
... let us go in accordance with the verdict of the city ... say. my dear brother, the very day you hear my letter set out and leave. i shall not seize. to my representatives: ... with ababa ... our assets ... he will not ... "
from aššur-malik, šalim-aššur and iliya to šalim-aššur: before aššur-šadu'e arrived, before he brought your letter, šu-bēlum arrived two months before aššur-šadu'e, and šu-bēlum seized šu-kūbum son of aššur-bēl-awātim and his brother and conducted them to the city assembly, and then it was us who rebuffed the matter, saying: their case is closed. he is reopening a matter that has been sworn by the city." the city passed a verdict, stating that šu-bēlum and issu-arik's daughter must not raise claim against šu-kūbum and his brother. šu-kūbum must go to kanesh to make you and itūr-ilī confirm to šu-bēlum that he entrusted the goods to you. since he has raised claim against you for everything that had been sworn by the city, you must come and open a case for your paternal estate within one year. dated the beginning of the month bēlat-ekallim, the eponymy of elāli son of ikūnum. urgent! as to your tablets, your witnesses, your judges, those who settled your affair - he who will come to the city should come; he who will not come you must extradite - confirm your tablets and your witnesses! come and give a lawsuit for your paternal estate, for if you do not come, they will take 4 talents of tin and 100 on your account. the tablets belonging to him with his witnesses have been put before the city assembly and they have entered the city hall. they are in the city hall. šu-bēlum holds a certified tablet with the king's seal, stating that you must give him a lawsuit within one year. since the matter was concluded two months ago, when we heard the letters that aššur-šadu'e brought, we made inquiries but we did not go back to the city assembly. kuziziya brought 10 minas of silver; hinnaya brought 10 minas of silver, and 20 minas of silver have been deducted from your debt. later on šu-bēlum came and he said to hinnaya: "i entrusted 20 minas of silver to you." without those who know about it hinnaya informed him and said: "yes, you entrusted (that) to me. i shall make inquiries, and if they did not bring it, i shall buy it at a merchant's house and pay you." šu-bēlum said: "the 10 minas that kuziziya brought is available." hinnaya gave in in the matter and borrowed 10 minas of silver from a merchant's house and paid him. also, hinnaya received a certified tablets stating that it will be deducted from your debt. in all, 30 minas of silver will be deducted from your debt. send the silver to hinnaya so the interest will not make you suffer. in the matter concerning aššur-bāni ... confronted the city assembly and ... had you been present, would they (not) have treated his words as chaff? for the statement where you said: "may the city judge my case", you are to pay 1 mina 10 shekels of silver. since he formally mentioned a bribe but did not prove it, had you been present, would he (not) be dead? we borrowed the silver against interest and paid it. send silver. urgent! do not act superior in this matter! come and clear it up. what can your investors do for you? you have no answer to them, except saying: "i have been extradited!" you do not consider your losses, you do not seek the face of your god! urgent! as soon as you have heard the letter, strengthen your tablets and your witnesses, set out and come! ... an attorney ..."
thus šu-ištar, say to ennam-suen: why have you written me as follows: 'your maid has contracted a debt of 0.5 mina of silver'. she is not only wicked, but is also contracting a debt for her ... ... ... ... i have sent her consignments of silver amounting to 10 minas and 10 shekels! over there, you are not even looking! is it really to me that you are being nice? get rid of the maid, sell her to a man from talhat, do not sell her to an assyrian!""
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: as to the 0.5 mina of silver that you sent to me in hurrama, ennānum son of kuziya brings you 0.5 mina of silver under my seal. the missives from thecity that they brought to you, my dear brother, to the first express caravan ...
aššuriš-tikal son of sukalliya has received 17 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by ennam-aššur son of suen-nādā, by aššur-imittī, by išme-ilum, by enna-suen, by i..., by alā... his brother, by elāli son of ippilis.
i left with your envoys to sue for blood-money for my brother. we met with the king of tawniya and the envoys said: our brother has died in your territory. we and his brothers are your fathers. search for the blood-money for the man together with us." the king answered: "wait! ... i shall not add ... to your brother's ... i spent at least 5 minas of silver." i myself escaped death and i arrived safely in kanesh and said: "my brother was killed because of your iron. the silver that he took away in the name of lā-qēp - surely he was killed for the silver for the iron that you gave to him. go and sue for the blood-money for my brother." the colony questioned him saying: "the man was killed because of your iron. go and sue for the blood-money for the man." he answered: "i shall not go. i have a tablet concerning the man's debt. because of the iron i have been released of my reponsibility." in accordance with the colony i announced that so far my father's ... has not been idle, and he has not cleared the tablets, or the fortune of my brother, which my brother has. they chose(?) with your envoys and ... he paid on the orders and the silver from my father's debt to the eponym ..."
to innaya and ... from ilī-bāni: of the 30 minas of silver that balṭu-šar brought to amur-ištar's house: additions were 0.6666 mina 2.5 shekels - 0.3333 of a mina. 4 talents less 5 minas of tin at the rate in silver 1 to 17, its price in silver: 17.3333 minas 1.3333 shekels. 100 including those from the wrapping cost 8.5 minas 8 shekels. 5 black donkeys cost 1.5 mina 3.5 shekels. 15 shekels: export-duty. 14 shekels: both harness and fodder for the donkeys. 3 shekels: of the . we gave 0.5 mina 1 shekel as the working capital of hani to him. of the working capital of hani that you gave to balṭu-šar we received 10 shekels of silver as his own assets. he said: as for hani..." šamaš-ṭāb son of ga...mannum and hani lead 90, 2 talents 10 minas (of tin), 4 donkeys and their harness to you. as the road has become open ... minas of tin ... his top-pack ... we shall dispatch as soon as possible. 25 minas ... we gave (to) šamaš-ṭāb. ... purchase of 15 shekels of silver. ... give to innaya."
[2.5] textiles [in the palace] they took for sale, [they will balance him?] 1.5 shekel of silver. [to 1] 0.5 shekel of silver the losses ... amounted. the price of 2.5 tiles, [0.5 mina of si]lver, aššur-ṣulūlī gave to kūn-ilum. separately, 5 11 / 12 shekels of silver of his one-third-share aššur-ṣulūlī took. thereof: 2 talents 10 minas of tin under seals applied in the city, 4 dark textiles, its wrapping, 12 -textiles, 2 black donkeys, and separately one -textile of ku'uku. all this ku'uku brought to hinnāya. of the (remaining) 1 talent of tin with its surplus that i entrusted here <<and>> 6 minas were (paid) as import-tax, [for] 3 talents of tin the -tax amounted to 34 minas of tin, 12.5 minas of tin kūn-ilum took, 8 minas 31 shekels ilī-ālum took, 2.83333 minas of tin from the deficiency of the loose tin we handed over to ku'uku. aššur-ṣulūlī represented to hinnāya.
100 fine , 10 talents of tin and its extras, 10 of medium quality for the packing, 7.5 black donkeys - all this, belonging to a merchant; 117 -textiles including for the packing, 5 talents of tin and its extras, 5.5 black donkeys, 3 šilipkian textiles and 2 garments for my representatives; further, 1 garment and 2 thin textiles for būr-aššur; 2 šilipkian textiles and 2 garments for ilī-bāni; further - belonging to the lady - 2 white garments for būr-aššur; 2 šilipkian textiles for ilī-bāni; in all: 15 textiles; 22 belonging to the packers; further, 6 fine robes - their price in silver was 2 minas - i gave into the care of ennam-aššur; 40 minas of sickles, 30 minas of nails, 3.5 minas of silver and 30 minas of tin - all this i gave into the care of ennam-aššur. all this - belonging to innaya and the merchant - ennam-aššur will lead. witnessed by babali, by pilah-ištar, by bitaya.
šu-kūbum son of ennam-anum has received 1.3333 mina of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by ilī-ašrannī son of sukkalliya, by enna-suen son of iddin-abum.
to mannu-kī-aššur and ahātum from uṣur-ša-aššur; specifically to mannu-kī-aššur: my dear brother, if the maid wants silver, give her some 2 shekels of silver. the representatives of my investor have been seized here for a lawsuit. i shall arrive one month after this letter. as for your silver, the 2 shekels that you will give to the maid, i shall personally bring you purchases from the city of aššur. i am well. the maid must not make any debts there. and she must guard the tablets of the customers that i left.
ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur will give 1.5 mina of silver to šu-ištar son of šukkutum when he goes to the city, and on his return šu-ištar will pay 3 minas of refined silver to ennam-aššur. witnessed by šumi-abiya son of amuraya, by lā-qēp son of šu-aššur.
šalim-aššur made us approach amur-ištar, and šalim-aššur said to amur-ištar: why have you seized the copper that was the proceeds from my textiles?" amur-ištar answered: "yes, i have seized 4 talents of poor copper. i seized it without hinnaya's permission and without witnesses." šalim-aššur said: "did you take copper from haburat?" amur-ištar answered: "i took what i could grab." amur ištar continued: "but did you not seize my merchandise worth 10 minas of silver?" šalim-aššur answered: "i have seized nothing." amur-ištar said: "i have sent my servant to zalpa. when my servant comes i shall discuss (further)." amur-ištar continued: "it is i who am suing you, not you who are suing me." witnessed by amurrum-bāni, by pūšu-kēn. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. "
sealed by šu-kūbum son of aššur-idī, by iddin-ištar son of aššur-idī; suen-nādā son of ennam-aššur was our (absent) partner. the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
to kuziziya, ištar-lamassī, nāb-suen, anna-anna, amur-ištar, šalim-wardī (and) mannum-kī-iliya from ennam-aššur: 1 ½ mina 5 shekels of silver sealed by kukuwa and by me plus 7 black donkeys with their harness - all this belonging to me, mannum-kī-iliya brings to you. in addition to this silver that mannum-kī-iliya brings to you, for the 3 minas silver and its interest that kukuwa owes to mannum-kī-aššur son of puzur-ištar, and for which he holds 20 talents of wool as security - say to my representatives: whatever silver ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya ask for there, lend them silver against interest according to the rate of the colony - from what silver you have received from my outstanding claims, or silver i sent to anna-anna under my seal; then write a tablet for ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya, her son, with joint liability, and give the tablet to my maid so it may remain in her possession until i come. also, you must assist ...
we entered with aššur-šamšī when he was about to go on a journey and ennam-suen said to aššur-šamšī: please, before we drink from the cup i want to declare something to you, do not get angry! when they detained me in wašhaniya did my sister send you to me with 2 minas of silver?" aššur-šamšī answered: "sure, she sent me, but i did not give it to you." ennam-suen then said: "today my sister has come back here and she said: 'you have done me wrong! produce the silver and its interest due since eight years and give it to me!'" aššur-šamšī answered: " trew myself down at the feet of aššur-imittī, saying: 'please, my brothers, here are gold, 15 shekels, and 1 mina of carnelian, appease the palace as well as you can'". aššur-šamšī also said to ennam-suen: "if the silver (due) has increased much then come here, let me seize your witnesses and do with me what you think best!" ennam-suen answered aššur-šamšī as follows: "the palace <has> a substantial silver claim on me ... ...""
to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: the brought me 29 shekels of silver and small goods under seal. annima and eništārum brought you 10 minas of silver. the silver you sent me i have paid to cover my balance payments. the weather ... and the caravan has been stopped. my dear brothers, among the goods of the merchant there are some old textiles. take care and decide about the goods. my dear brothers, send me silver, the proceeds from the tin, and deposit my silver to my debit. i hold on to the goods until your orders arrive.
say to elamma, thus aššur-mālik: the silver you sent me and your tablets i have now sent to the city following your instruction. as for the silver of the colonial office that you sent for lā-qēpum, i gave that silver to lalum. in addition to that silver and the 5 textiles that i deposited, silver has been paid from lā-qēpum's silver. let your silver go to lā-qēpum and then, when the silver is spent we will register it in your name in the colonial office. as for the silver of amur-ištar, which he owes to lā-qēpum and to you, there came a message of lā-qēpum, addressed to lalum and you, in which he said: 'seize (him for) the days he is overdue and claim (an interest of) 1 shekel per mina and make him pay the silver and the interest on it.' you must decide on behalf of us what to do with your silver. sell all the textiles that bēlum-bāni left behind for you at any price, ... for copper by our own 1-mina-weight. it must not be stocked; the silver ...""
my certified tablets, my copies and memoranda.
ir'am-aššur seized us against ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur, son of ilī-ālum, la-qēpum, son of puzur-anna, and išuhum, son of šuli, representing šuli, and ir'am-aššur said: 2.5 minas of silver belonging to šuli, son of buzutaya, which ennam-suen, son of iliya, gave me for making purchases and which i kept in my possession and for which ah-šalim, son of buzutāya, bēlānum, son of šu-aššur, and aššur-taklāku, son of ali-ahum settled my case, with that silver yousing. have been satisfied as representative of šuli. šuli, son of buzutāya, shall not raise a claim (for it) against me'. ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur, la-qēp, son of puzur-anna, and išuhum, son of šuli, answered i'ram-aššur: "with the silver of šuli, whose affair with you has been settled, we have satisfied šuli. on the basis of what your record states the will sue you for the silver". during the week of aššuriš-tikal, son of sukkalliya, month x of the eponymy of maṣi-ilī. in the presence of kudādum, son of aššur-[ṭāb], of ilī-nādā, son of asšur-nādā."
to mannum-kī-aššur, nab-suen, anna-anna and daraš from ennam-aššur: as to the 1 mina of refined silver under my seal, 30 minas of good copper under my seal, 2 slave-girls plus their 2 children- alulaya has laid claim to all this for daraš' debt. šāt-anna brings you the silver and copper under my seal. let daraš bring the slave-girls and their children into my house, and let the silver remain with mannum-kī-aššur; sell the slave-girls at the best available price, and let daraš pay to you another mina of silver, and then mannum-kī-aššur must confirm the silver under my seal among the checked silver; for in all 2 minas of silver you and daraš must make a purchase in kanesh that will benefit him, and the (you buy) should enter mannum-kī-aššur's (house). then, have the silver paid in the same place. as long as a has not entered, do not release a single shekel of silver to daraš. he must check he that you buy, and let them remain with mannum-kī-aššur. do not release them to him until i come. also, i shall pay up the food of the slave-girls as a substitute for daraš. take care!
certified tablets concerning anatolians.
to aššur-damiq from nini: i keep going for ... silver but he refuses to give me anything. iliya has not given me silver or salt. in kanesh ... to ... that you left with me. urgent, send me copper belonging to emmerum. do not expect silver. he gives me nothing. if you are truly my lord, satisfy me with the silver from the anatolian.
0.3333 mina 1.3333 shekel of refined silver is in šēp-ištar's possession.
when zuzuwa son of itūr-ilī married his wife i gave 3 shekels of silver to his wife.
29 dark textiles of šu-ištar, 15 textiles of ennam-suen - in all 44 dark textiles of šu-ištar and ennam-suen. thereof: 4 textiles used for wrapping, 4 textiles import-tax, 4 textiles by pre-emption. - 32 textiles.
say to elamma and kurub-ištar, thus ēnah-ilī: 4 talents 20 minas of tin under seals, 72 -textiles, including those for wrapping, 4 black donkeys, 29.3333 minas of loose tin - all this i am leading to you. your tin was bought at a rate of 13.6666 (shekels) per (shekel silver). tin is expensive, send 2 minas of silver to reach me en route". say to elamma: "160 kutānu-textiles, 7 black donkeys, i am leading to you; abu-šalim travels with me. send me also small wares for a value of 10 shekels of silver."
from ennam-aššur to damiq-pī-aššur: i wrote to you earlier, saying: if your caravan is being packed, then you too should pack together with your caravan, and choose textiles of good quality from the goods of the merchant that you are leading, and leave them in mamma or in unapse, and the rest of the less good textiles - both from what remains of the merchant's and from your own working capital and from the working capital of the servants - should enter the palace together with your partners." now, winter has caught you in uršu. since there is a lot of snow i have not sent anyone on whom i could rely for the goods of the merchant. when you are released (from the cold), then i shall send either myself or someone i can rely on, and i shall take a decision about the merchant's goods. why did you write, saying: "a heated letter from the merchant came." i have personally been delayed and been unable to take any decision about the merchant's goods. come on, it is to me you write! urgent, guard the goods of the merchant; and with regard to your message where you said: "there are some old textiles" urgent, the very day you hear my letter you and ilī-ašrannī should air all of the textiles in the store-room of a friend, and leave them for 3 or 5 days before you turn them over. do not let anyone else approach (them). do not hesitate for 10 days! i have sent uṣur-ši-ištar to enišārum concerning your tin. when they come back from zalpa, i shall send ali-ahum. i sent ilī-tūram to you with 0.5 mina of refined silver and small goods worth 3 shekels under my seal. idnaya and aluwa are bringing you 15 shekels of silver, the proceeds from your textile. your donkeys should be fed. "
ennam-aššur answered the attorney and ali-ahum, and ennam-aššur said to ali-ahum: we are inheritors. we have not (finished) checking. when our father in the city entrusted merchandise to you and (sent it) to his representatives - iddin-abum son of aššur-rabi, itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar, ennānum son of amriya, enah-ilī son of šu-aššur, myself and you together with them, in fact, we were the representation of šalim-aššur, our father - then apart from this merchandise transported by you, šalim-aššur did not send any other merchandise. our father's agents and we knew how these goods - that you yourself brought up here - that these goods were cleared in their house. also our answer went to the city, to our father, the very day you brought the goods up here, and it is in the city. a claim to these goods has been made by our father's agents. as you well know, it was for our sake that i converted to silver the goods they took care of for me, and i paid the silver, the proceeds from the goods, to our father's representatives and to you, and they have sent the silver under their seals to the city to our father. also, i have impartial witnesses against you (plur.) as to who transported the silver. do not obstruct me! also, one year ago, even before the attorneys came up here, i pleaded with you, saying: "come! let us confront 5 impartial investors with our father's agents to prove that for every shekel of silver that our father's agents checked us for in response to the missive from our father that idnaya brought, for the silver, the proceeds from the goods and his outstanding claims, that we cleared with them while our father was alive, and a message from his agents and one from us went back to him in the city with his messenger idnaya concerning how much silver was deposited with me and with you." as for you, until this day you have refused a deal with me, and you are unwilling to arrange a meeting, and instead you keep writing to procure an attorney and a tablet of the city. i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. come! it concerns your ... let us arrange a meeting witnessed by this attorney with 5 investors in addition to the 4 who represent our father, and let the silver, the proceeds from the goods and the outstanding claims be recognized with them as witnesses, and let him deduct the silver deposits that will come to our father plus the expenses that he has paid, and let us pay the rest of the silver, as much as they will set down as owed by us, and let us go with the attorney and ... "
to šu-tammuzī, elaya, adida, lamassī and ennam-aššur from ennam-aššur and ali-ahum:in durhumit our father's investors have seized 40 talents of washed copper, assets that our father left; they also detain us. we said: apart from this copper our father left no other assets. have the copper converted to silver and let the silver go to the city, and then let goods be transported from the city so you may be paid in full in silver."... the men make trouble ... not only do they hold the 40 talents of copper, our father's assets, but they say: "let us also take away the lapis lazuli, your father's votive offering." our dear fathers and lords, the men are ready to remove the lapis lazuli, our father's votive offering from us. take care to confront the city and act so that the votive offerings for aššur are not lost, get a tablet from the city stating that the lapis lazuli must be converted to silver and until the votive offerings are brought in ... also, hire an attorney and have him leave together with aluwa and save our lives. for these votive offerings our father died."
25 textiles: ikūnum son of ilī-ellat; 23 textiles: issu-arik; 20 textiles: butqum; 17 textiles: šu-laban son of amur-ilī; 7 textiles: anum-ilī; 8 textiles: aššur-malik son of panaka; 20 textiles: elamma son of ikūnum - in all 120 textiles in the caravan of ikūnum son of ilī-ellat. after the caravan of puzur-ilī (has come) they will receive them.
to alulaya, dan-aššur and lā-qēp from ennam-aššur: 1.5 mina of refined silver, 3.1666 shekels of gold dust under my seal, 20 sheep, 1 ox and one slave - all this šalim-bēlī and ewarimuša lead to you. let the silver stay with my maid under my seal, but sell the sheep and the ox, and the silver for them should be available. 1 mina 15 shekels of silver plus its interest is owed by ennānum, the ; 3 talents 35 minas of washed copper is owed by bēliya; 0.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver is owed by hatahšu; 10 shekels is owed by ilališkan, the smith. my dear brothers, their terms are overdue. make them pay the silver. 9 shekels of silver is owed by our own šu-ištar, ṣill-abum's representative; he has sent me the silver from hanaknak. let it stay under his seal. let them take small goods worth 1.5 shekels of silver.
peruwa owes 0.3333 mina 5 shekels of silver, the price of a slave-girl.
... under our seals; at the rate of 15.3333 to 1: in silver 45.3333 minas 1 shekel;
sealed by ennānum son of ali-abum, by dan-aššur son of irnuid, by buzuwa son of aššur-ṭāb, by aduda son of zuwa. concerning the 7 minas 7 shekels of tin from the balance payment that kuziya owes to the caravan - dan-aššur has paid the tin. reckoned at the rate 1:7 dan-aššur has received 1 mina 10 shekels of refined silver from imdī-dan's silver from šalim-aššur. if imdī-dan's representatives and kuziya claim the 7 minas 7 shekels of tin from šalim-aššur, dan-aššur son of irnuid will clear him. month ša-sarrātim, eponymy iddin-abum.
say to lullu, ennam-aššur and abu-šalim thus aššur-ṭāb: i hear that aššur-ṭāb has unfortunately died. please my fathers and lords, the very day you hear my letter you must clear both the earlier and the later merchandise and put it under seal and send abu-šalim here with the first opportunity. if any copper is still unsold, sell it at any price and ship it(s yield) here. not a single shekel of silver must be retained there!""
thus a[... ... ... ... ... ...], say to libaya: my merchandise is safe, and i myself am also well. you wrote me as follows: 'i left behind 1.5 talent of silver'. half of it i collected, half of it is lost.""
seal of kanesh. to kuliya, the-payer, our messenger, to every single , wherever sukkaliya, son of aššuriš-tikal is staying, small and big.
šu-ištar seized us against puzur-aššur, the son of itūr-ilī, and šu-ištar said to puzur-aššur: the 4 shekels of gold, which you owe <to>? šāt-aššur are of very good quality!" puzur-aššur answered: "indeed, i owe it, i will pay." ṣilulu and dadaya, son of the man from ubra?. gave their ta[blet] before the .-emblem of aššur. šu-[], son of izizam-ilī and abiya, son of ataya, heard their statement."
for the 43 shekels of gold, [which] ibnaya has in his possession, we paid the import-tax on it and the (remaining) 40.6666 shekels of gold we bought and at 7.6666 shekels (of silver) per (shekel of gold); its (equivalent) in silver was 5 minas 11.83333 shekels. 3 minas 56 shekels of silver i took for textiles and tin and the rest of his silver, 1 mina 15
iddin-abum son of šu-ištar owes 2 shekels of gold to ali-ahum. reckoned from the month huburhe will pay in 2 months. if he has not paid in time, he will add interest according to the rule of the colony. eponym: ṣilulu. witnessed by elāli son of ippilis, by bisaya, by bēlum-bāni son of aššur-bēl-awātim.
from ilī-dan to ennam-aššur: ... for erradi ... textiles šu-zuzu son of erradi ... the textiles ... give what silver you have bought to šu-zuzu. as to the textiles that šar-adad brings, of those 2 textiles for aššur-imittī son of amur-ilī, belonging to me, have been sealed as a favour. 3.3333 textiles have been sealed for you. 1 previous textile that i gave to you plus these - sell them for any price and send me the proceeds. of the donkeys of šar-adad 1 donkey belongs to me and to aššur-imittī. with respect to the grain that i promised you, send me silver so i can buy grain for you, and explain where it is stored.
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: 48 good -textiles, 2 ordinary textiles, 2 talents 10 minas of sealed tin, 18.5 minas of expense-tin, 2 textiles belonging to aššur-bēl-awātim, 3 black donkeys - all this i lead to you. i rented a driver until hahhum for 17 shekels of silver. send 0.5 mina of copper to me. send one of your servants before (i come). my dear brother and lord, send me word to inform me. they do not know anyone other than ali-ahum son of dudiki. it is he who brings the tablet.
from itūr-ilī to ennam-aššur: buy 5 talents of washed copper ... another ... on my journey, and let it be deposited there. ... i shall release, and they will balance it with him.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, ennānum, enah-ilī and ennam-aššur: as to what you wrote to me about, saying: enter the colony and bring your house in order, and then, clear the affairs with your sons and do not hang your head all the time." since my servants have acted high-handedly until this day and have not travelled to damiq-pī-aššur, and have not converted my goods to silver - for that reason i became worried, and since my textiles are infested with moths, i thought: "let me enter with my goods and collect my assets, so that i may receive some 10 minas of silver that may be collected from my customers. let me enter kanesh with my assets." my dear brothers, until i clear myself, you there - together with the representatives of the affiliated traders who are staying there - should pester the men for the case, learn what they have to say and let them set the terms that are possible for them, and make me approach the colony. they know the losses and the maintenance, but without permission from my investors ilī-ālum, šu-kūbum, aššur-malik and amur-ištar's son i cannot leave to go overland. they say: "leave, we shall settle your matter ourselves with lā-qēpum, and then send you word, so you yourself can collect your assets and then we shall set the terms for you as best we can." my dear brothers, the men are favourable towards us. pester them there for the case that i may clear myself, and then send word to me personally and give me encouragement. keep an eye there on my servants just as you have done thus far, and let them assemble every last shekel of silver from my outstanding loans. take care and encourage me and show me the eyes of the colony and your own eyes."
their case concerning šalim-aššur - šu-bēlum for the wife of issu-arik, the daughter of issu-arik and the daughter of iddin-abum, the attorney and šu-bēlum (on his own) swore an oath on the city with šalim-aššur and their case was concluded. ... šu-kūbum and his brother will come and confirm šalim-aššur for the goods, the tin and textiles. aššur-taklāku was the attorney. šu-bēlum, the wife of issu-arik, the daughter of issu-arik and the daughter of iddin-abum must not raise claim to these goods against šalim-aššur, šu-kūbum or his brother. if they do raise claim, šu-bēlum and the attorney will clear them. witnessed by amurrum-bāni, by aššur-idī, by šu-kūbum, by šumma-libbi-aššur.
... why, someone from among my sons bought the house. lamassī lives in it.
to ali-ahum from amur-ištar: aššuriš-takil recieved 9 talents 17 minas of copper, our father's share, in the office of the colony. as for me, you gave me instructions, saying: the copper from our father's share should be converted to good copper and give it on credit to an affiliated trader." before the copper left the office of the colony, ... minas ... a matter, and he will recieve 10 talents of bad copper, our fathers share, in aššuriš-takil's house, and at one to four i wrote his tablet for 2 talents 30 minas of good copper. he will pay the good copper in 40 weeks. also, i seized 2 minas of silver belonging to bēlum-bāni from annina, and then i added the 2 minas of silver that i seized to his tablet and wrote his tablet concerning the silver and good copper. he is to pay the silver and the copper in 40 weeks. of the 9 talents 17 minas of copper, the copper from our father's share, (that) aššuriš-takil recieved, thereof annina took 4 talents 37 minas of bad copper in accordance with our agreement. he looked down on the rest of your copper; he will not take it. according to agreement he shall not treat the copper of our father's share, that came out of aššuriš-takil's house, with disdain. when he was about to leave ... and they refused to take it and he has left for kanesh. instruct him there so that 4 talents 30 minas of bad copper that is in iddin-aššur's house ... bad copper ... give him there either tin or a textile and let his tablet concerning 2 talents 30 minas of good copper indeed be his (valid) tablet."
puzur-šadu'e son of lā-qēp has received 5 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-rabi son of mannum-šumšu, by enna-suen son of iddin-abum, by iddin-aššur.
to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: my dear brothers, once or twice i have sent word to you. among the textiles belonging to the merchant there are some old textiles. do take a decision concerning the goods. aluwa is bringing you 1 fine textile. there you should send me silver together with the proceeds from my tin, thus doing me a favour.
for the 17 -textiles that were lost in batna the caravan paid us a compensation of 1.3333 mina of tin per (person). kura has successively obtained what he was entitled to. kura has received 0.3333 mina of silver, his working capital, in the city, (and) 0.5 mina of silver aššur-mālik sent to him en route. of the merchandise shipped under kurub-ištar's responsibility [kurub-iš]tar entrusted to me 2 talents of tin with its wrapping, 15 -textiles (and) 2 black donkeys. of this load he has broken the seals of one packet and has taken 11 minas of silver.
... i gave to lā-qēp son of šu-aššur. i hear that he sent his deposit. ask the son of puzur-šaduʾe there whether he sent ready cash or the proceeds from the . what silver he sent should remain in the hands of my maid under his own seal. my dear brothers, instruct the maid and ewarimuša there to collect my outstanding claims, and the silver you produce (plural) should remain in my house under your seals until i arrive. also, instruct my servants to gather grain and firewood. the maid should sell the grain, whether barley or wheat, that they bring in, for silver and the silver should remain in her house until i come. 12 shekels of silver is owed by pn. 6 wagons are owed by aši-uman. my dear brothers, clear my outstanding claims.
14 minas [x] + 8.6666 shekels of silver is the price of tin, textiles and donkeys.
10 shekels of refined silver for a working capital for šu-nūnu; 1 shekel for his sacrifice; 7 shekels for ilī-ašrannī our slave(?); 2 shekels for his sacrifice to šu-ištar son of šukkutum; 1.5 shekel for ilī-bāni; 1.5 shekel for aššur-lamassī son of šabahānum; 1 shekel for arašihatal; 1 shekel for abu-šalim; ... ... for tida... further, when aššur-ṭāb married inanna 1.5 shekel of silver for his maid;
to amurrum-bāni, ennānum and ennam-aššur from kukuwa: here i would set out on a journey and come, (but) iddin-ištar and adad-ṣulūlī on their own responsibility and said: we have seized all the silver belonging to mannum-balum-aššur that was in your possession." urgent, my dear brothers and lords, he terrified the house there ... his message should come to my representatives, so i can set out and come. ..."
of the 16 ⅚ minas of lapis lazuli from the votive offerings for aššur, thereof i gave 1 mina 5 ½ shekels to itūr-ilī and he sent ali-abum to timelkiya to make purchases. the merchant gave 2 minas 15 ½ shekels, also for purchase, to šu-ištar son of šukkutum. the rest of the lapis lazuli, 13 ⅓ minas 9 shekels, is with ennam-aššur.
thus iddin-suen say to ilī-bāni, ab[ila?] and enna(m)-suen: i wished to deposit my goods at the start, so why have you taken away my goods without having settled accounts with me? and today you have taken along my merchandise and the seals of my father and my investor(s), you have broken these seals without me even having seen them and so have ... ... ... ... my sister sent me a soft garment, but you have held back that garment. if, because of this textile, as if it were your father's, i have not cut your throat, what then do i owe you that you have held back 3 textiles of mine? that ... ... ... you are false(?) and the of .. ... ... ... ... ..., would i not know that? why have you taken away my goods?""
96 -textiles of iliya, 12 -textiles of aššur-lamassī, 100 of kurub-ištar, 98 of elamma.
to ennānum, aššur-bāni and ali-ahum from bēlum-bāni: concerning the tin i wrote to you about, where i said: give the tin to bēlānum and let bēlānum bring it, bēlānum travels here together with us. give it to šalim-aššur and let šalim-aššur bring the tin. concerning the silver that alulaya's representative paid to you - what silver you have paid on my debt and recovered the certified tablet with my seal - split that tablet and send it to me. then send me word about the rest of the silver. if you have made šu-kūbum pay silver, then make a profitable purchase for me and send it to me. ... aššur-nādā ... 5 shekels of silver ... and he gave me 10 minas of copper. seize him and make him pay 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver.
thus laliya, say to aššur-ennam and dadaya, and in particular to aššur-ennam: the antimony under my seal and the, which i left to you, please, my brother, give that antimony under my seal and the to dadaya. by no means fail to give the antimony and the to dadaya lest i get angry! say to dadaya: "if he does not give you the antimony and the, state to him your harsh condition!""
say to elamma, thus aššur-rē'ī: the 2 šulupkaean textiles i sent you aššur-mūtappil had taken for 30 minas of refined copper before i arrived. afterwards he said: 'take your textiles!' [as for 1] ... textile, instead of it they asked for another one. they deposited the textile(s) before me. please my father, my lord, they must not cheat me! let a message of yours come here so that they give me the price of the textiles, then i will leave. now then, as for what you said: 'leave quickly!' you are ...ing me.""
to itūr-ilī from alulaya and the merchant: the bundle of 16.6666 minas, sealed by alulaya, that šalim-wardī and ewarimuša brought to you and for which the name of the merchant was made known, and which we sent you for safe-keeping - ennam-aššur was the merchant. give the bundle to ennam-aššur there and then let him leave a message from you for me. with respect to the tin you sold, 27 minas of tin are in your possession; you sold 30 minas of tin and that is with pilah-ištar. my dear father, because of you i am delayed and my heart ...
on behalf of nuhšātum and ennam-aššur, i ... and puzur-ištar sat down; on behalf of amur-aššur, šu-hubur and adad-... sat down. these men concluded the matter of amur-aššur's maid, so that they will write to amur-aššur within 6 months after the week of aššur-imittī, and until amur-aššur's answer is sent across, he will leave nothing else apart from 6 shekels of silver.
during the bottom end of the week-eponymy 1 1 / 4 shekel for a sheep; 3 / 4 shekel for 3 double loads <of firewood>; 5 / 12 shekel for dried meat; 1.6666 shekel for butter; 2.5 shekels for a sheep at the time of our eponymy; 1.5 shekel for tables and ... ... ... ...; 22.5 grains for a pot-stand? which is in front of the chair; 1.5 shekel for wood of the ... ... ... ...; 2.6666 shekels for a sack of barley; 2 shekels for two jars of wheat also in walibani; 5 / 12 shekels paid for 3 loads of firewood; 1.5 shekel i paid for 4 jars of beer; (for) 2 jars of wheat 2.1666 shekels; (for) 2 jars of barley 2.3333 shekels was paid; i paid (it) during the week-eponymy. i paid 2.3333 shekels for a sack of barley; (for) 2 jars of wheat i paid 2.3333 shekels; i paid 1 shekel 75 grains for 3 loads; 0.3333 shekel for the grain offering that i made; 0.5 shekel i paid for reed in walibani; (for) 0.5 sack of barley i paid 2.3333 shekels; for 3 jars of wheat i paid 3.5 shekels; 1.3333? shekel for a sheep; 1.5 shekel for firewood of ... ... ... ... during the festival of parka; 1 / 6 shekel for ... ... ... ...
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: small goods worth 3 shekels of silver, bronze pins, 100 ... send to me. the servant of the s. of kasiya should bring it. on the day that ... in hahhum ...
to kuziziya, ali-ahum, ...num and šāt-[anna] from man-mahir: bēliya son of ilī-kurub from tišmurna owes me 6.5 talents of good copper. open for my tablets, produce his tablet and have him pay the copper and its interest there. also, he furthermore owes me 25 minas of good copper, the price of a donkey. he is to pay within x months from the day i wrote the tablet. if he has not paid (in time), interest will accrue for him in accordance with the rules of the colony. seize him and have him pay the copper and its interest. until my instructions arrive, seal it in a house belonging to one of you and let it remain there. if he clears you for the interest, then give him either 20 or 30 -textiles and let him do me a favour and so let him pay the copper for the textiles. the very day i wrote the letter to you i left for wahšušana. when you have heard the letter ... should come here. amur aššur our colleague brings you 1 shekel of silver. buy boots ... of good quality.
40 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, ennam-aššur entrusted to aluwa and enišārum in šalatuwar under seal. he said: bring it to my father šalim-aššur in the city!" he also gave 5 shekels of silver for their expenses. the wahšušana colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ilī-bāni son of amur-aššur, by ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar; tūram-ilī son of eddin-aššur was our (absent) partner."
šu-nūnu's caravan settled accounts in zalpa, and 7 minas 3 shekels of silver, the balance ... ...
2.5 minas of good copper, her terms were from last year, now panaka ... has received it.
thus iddin-suen, say to ennam-suen: the boy who is a barber hadiaššu is leading to you. sell him and collect [?], (and so) obtain silver. the 3 -textiles and the abarnian one that you held back, give them to hadiaššu to bring them to me. as long as you stay there you must hold him by his hem. if he does not come ... ... ...""
from lamassī to ali-ahum: why is it that since the attorney arrived and indeed that you keep sending me letters, yet until this day you do not come, to organise the affairs of your father's house and so do not clear your father's house, and ... the very day you hear my letter you (plur.) must set out and come and clear your father's house - so that you yourselves may then clear yourselves and the debt in silver to the city hall does not grow large. set out and come! 10 shekels of silver ... aššur-taklāka ...
to amur-šarrassa and peruwa from ištar-pilah; to peruwa: as to the tablet of the merchant that i gave you in hurrama, if you have received the silver from the merchant, then give it to amur-šarrassa. if you have not received the silver, then give the certified tablet of the merchant to amur-šarrassa. i have written you once or twice but you have not given me a reply. my dear brother, do me a favour!
to aššur-nimrī and ali-ahum (and) ilī-bāni from šu-zuzu: open for my tablets there and give to ilī-bāni a tablet concerning 40 minas of silver plus a second tablet concerning 20 minas of silver, the debt of ilī-bāni. also, let him give you the tablets with my seal that he holds. until he gives you the tablets with my seal, stating that any tablet of his that may appear is invalid, you must not release his tablet to him. keep the tablets with my seal that he gives to you and put them among my other tablets.
from lamassī to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: our father has died. ... the death of ennam-aššur ...-malik ...
say to elamma, thus aššur-imittī: 5 minas of silver under your seal būr-suen delivered and i myself and aššur-nādā we checked it and it proved to be 2 shekels too little. we paid 3 minas of silver for wool of the colonial office. as for the caravan of innāya and šu-nunu, there occurred deficits amounting to 10 textiles per (trader?), so that we could not deposit 0.3333 mina of the silver in the colonial office, but i paid 0.6666 mina of silver from your own silver. i paid 2 minas 6 shekels of silver for 6 donkeys. 12 shekels of silver, the price of your silver, is still due by me. of your lapis lazuli, which they brought here, they took 53 shekels as tithe. 32 shekels (of lapis lazuli) they bought at a rate of 2 : 1. with the price of your lapis lazuli under our seal būr-suen is on his way to you. from the 'one third parts' of the caravan of innāya and aššur-taklāku you will receive [x] minas 13 shekels of silver. send one servant to luhusaddiya and let them take the / a donkey."
seal of manum, son of kabiya, seal of aššur-ṭāb, son of šu-ištar, seal of ahušu, son of aššur-idī, seal of šu-ellil, son of mannu-kī-aššur. 5 minas of good quality ilver šu-elil, son of mannu-kī-aššur, owes to išme-aššur, son of hinnāya. from the week of kulumaya, month v, year eponymy of samaya, he will pay within [x] weeks; if he does not pay he will add in accordance with the regulation of the colony an interest of 1.5 shekel per month per mina. seal of puzur-anna, son of iddin-adad, seal of āmur-aššur, son of aššur-bēl-awātim, seal of [ennam-[aššur, his brother, seal of ikūn-pī-aššur, son of hinnāya. 5 talents of refined copper āmur-aššur, son of aššur-bēl-awātim, <and> ennam-aššur, his brother, owe to lipit-ištar. they will pay in 5 years; when they do not pay they will add 1.5 mina per (talent) per month as interest. ikūn-pī-aššur, son of hinnāya, is guarantor. month vii, eponymy year of buzutaya.
šalim-aššur seized us and said to šu-bēlum and enna-suen: i have paid some 1 or 2 talents of silver for your father's debt out of my joint-stock capital. come on, look at the tablets concerning your father's debt and pay me my silver." they said: "our father's tablets and copies were sealed with the seals of šu-illil, amur-ištar and šu-anum, and they are in the city. if indeed you can establish anything as owed by our father, will you refuse to take the full amount in the city?" šalim-aššur answered šu-bēlum: "i have personally promised to collect the silver that is abroad. why have you taken silver from dada's son in hahhum?" šu-bēlum answered: "yes, i took it." so he asked enna-suen, saying: "why have you taken silver in timel-kiya?" he answered: "i shall look whether i took any, but there is nothing." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by akuza, by lalum, by šu-kūbum, by aššur-imittī, by itūr-ilī."
say to nab-suen, ennam-aššur, suen-rē'ī, and aššuriš-tikal, thus išme-aššur: i wrote you as follows: 'the wife of hali-abum is dead. collect everything she left behind and bring it into one single storeroom and seal it in my name'. i hear by rumor that somebody intends to marry the maid. make inquiries and whether it is an assyrian or an anatolian, set witnesses against him. he shall not marry her! seize everything she left behind, also outstanding claims. please, my brothers, take care, (for) the man may take along a lot of silver. make me obtain my assets!""
to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur; seal of puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan.
enna-suen answered dan-aššur. enna-suen said to dan-aššur: i am an heir. you have shown me a tablet and in the tablet concerning 12 minas of silver that you have shown me the name of your father puzur-aššur was not indicated, nor was anybody's name indicated. you do not provide proof for me. may it be like this: i am the heir. i have many brothers. let us take the tablet and if your father puzur-aššur had any claim on my father iddin-abum, then on top of my father's seal i too shall ... i shall personally stand up for you together with my brothers. i shall seize your witnesses. "
to aššur-nimrī and ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur; seal of šu-zuzu son of aššur-rē'ī.
15 shekels of refined silver malaba owes to ennam-suen. from month vi, eponymy of šudaya, son of ennānum he will pay within 3 weeks. if he does not pay he will add interest according to the regulation of the colony. if the sons of aššur-ṭāb raise a claim against malaba ennam-suen will clear him. before puzur-aššur, before aššur-dugul.
to ilī-emūqī, šu-tammuzi, abiya, elaya and lamassī from adida and ali-ahum: šalim-aššur invested 3.3333 minas of gold in aššuriš-tikal son of sukkalliya. when šalim-aššur was about to leave he said to šu-tammuzi, adida and elaya: my dear brothers, i owe silver to the eponym amur-aššur. lay claim on behalf of the eponym amur-aššur and of yourselves to the tablet concerning aššuriš-tikal, ennānum and hannaya; they should pay the silver and the accrued profit and then satisfy the eponym amur-aššur. the rest of the silver should stand available for my customers." we keep seizing aššuriš-tikal and ilī-emūqī here, saying: "šalim-aššur has invested 3.3333 minas of gold ..." ... our words ... adida and ali-ahum ... enna-suen son of kurara ... the silver. he will pay the silver to the eponym amur-aššur and the tablet concerning 3.3333 minas of gold that šalim-aššur invested in aššuriš-tikal the eponym and ... šalim-aššur to ..."
to šu-tammuzi, elaya, aššur-massuʾī and ennam-aššur; specifically to aššur-massuʾī from ennam-aššur: here you confronted me five or ten times, and you said: my dear brother, let me not stay with empty hands and perish! give me at least 2 minas of silver, preferably more, show me aššur's eye and the eye of my sister, then as long as i live i shall never forget you." yes, these were the words you swore to me before aššur and our fathers' god. i released you from your bonds, but then it was me you made to suffer with 5 men or more, and now, my father's investors detain me! they have not granted me access to your house. while i gave you silver for your house and opened your eyes, you have done this to me! may the god know that i saved you from darkness and you repaid me thus! moreover, my wife gave you 1 mina of silver as the price of tiltitiš and her daughter, but you refused to let tiltitiš be installed in my house and carry out the work load; instead, with an angry face you recount your calumnies. also, i gave 5 shekels of silver and 2 sacks of wheat to your wife mula, and your father's maid rages against me and you every day over the girl. you said: "do not abuse me! i shall send her the shipments." i gave her 3 shekels of silver and a sack of wheat. do not lick your fire! send word so i can sell tiltitiš or my slave and collect the silver. do not become very angry with me again! send word to your representatives, so they grant me access to your house."
2 minas of silver for baziya; 1 mina of silver with the interest on it of dān-aššur; 1 mina of silver of the colonial office; 0.5 mina of silver wawali (and) aššur-imittī - of this ir'am-aššur will take 2 minas 30.5 shekels of silver. all this i left to ir'am-aššur, in the presence of šu-ištar, son of dadānum, and of sabasiya.
sealed by akuza son of šu-anum, by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by lā-qēp son of puzur-ištar. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar was our (absent) partner.
from bēlum-bāni to ali-ahum and zukuwa: amur-aššur son of babalānum owes me 6 minas of silver. he said: i shall go and satisfy ... and silver belonging to bēlum-bāni ... that i personally owe ..." ... he said: ... -copper ... that he paid to me ... and the representatives of amur-aššur son of babalānum left 2 minas of silver and 1 talent 20 minas of copper for me. seize him and let him send word to me, so i can redeem the silver and take it for my own needs. concerning your silver that mannum-kī-aššur once or twice ... i wrote to šalim-aššur, our representative ..."
from aššur-ni... and ali-ahum to...: they brought 1.5 mina of [silver] and 2.5 talents 5 minas of copper under your seal. [the copper] was sold at the rate 0.6666 shekel 15 grains. of that the silver for 50.83333 minas of copper remain. we took it easy for one month. your copper is safe(?) and we made your brother pay 0.5 mina 6.6666 shekels of silver and 2.3333 shekels of silver in interest. with all this we bought 44 -textiles for you; their price in silver was 12.6666 minas x shekels. thereof 18 were -textiles. 17 shekels was the price of a donkey; we gave 10 shekels of silver to la-qēp; šu-ištar received 15.6666 shekels; we gave 6 shekels of silver to your maid; la-qēp received 3.3333 shekels for fees and fodder. of the 12 -textiles that you left, 1 textile was for your dress. 1 litre of fine oil. with respect to the undergarments you left, either the or those of the he brings a memorandum with their number. all this we entrusted to šu-ištar(?) and he brings it to you. the robe you left here has also been sold for 1 mina 6 shekels and the proceeds in silver is in ali-ahum's possession.
to ... ... they wrote my tablets for iddin-abum's debt for his guarantor.
suen-nādā seized us against puzur-aššur in purušhaddum, and suen-nādā said to puzur-aššur: i gave you 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver. if, after you leave for the country, you cannot (come up with) my silver, you must pay 2 minas of silver." puzur-aššur answered: "do not hold me back. if i owe anything, the produce (evidence) and take it." the kanesh colony gave me for these proceedings, and i gave my testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by aššur-nīšu son of azukaya. innaya son of ... was my absent partner."
of the 10 minas of silver that iddin-abum owes to the colony we deducted 4 shekels per mina and the two eponyms, iddin-aššur son of babilum and puzur-aššur, received 9.3333 minas of refined silver from šalim-ahum, and reckoned from the week of akuza he will pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. witnessed by aššur-šamšī, by iddin-aššur son of aššur-malik.
sealed by alulaya; to ennam-aššur.
i gave 3.5 minas of good copper plus 1 shekel of silver to puzur-amurrum son of nimar-ištar.
from damiq-pī-aššur to puzur-aššur: if in your falseness you have left your tin, (and) you brought it into kanesh, then ... your tin. if you brought your tin into kanesh together with him, then ... and come. ... and you ... of your tin ... produce. it is important that you set out and leave the very day you hear my letter, before word ...
to adida and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur and puzur-aššur as well: 11 good textiles belonging to me, 11 good textiles belonging to puzur-aššur, 37 minas of wool belonging to us both, tin worth 6 shekels of silver for his disposal - all this we entrusted to šalim-bēlī, slave of amur-aššur s. of adad-bāni (and) aššur-pilah - the textiles under our seals. if our textiles have arrived safely and entered (the city), pay 3 shekels of silver to two hired men out of the proceeds from the wool, and give the rest of the silver to šalim-bēlī and his partner and indicate to me how much silver they have received. zuzuwa brought you 1 good textile; kulumaya brought you 1 good textile belonging to puzur-aššur. sell our wrapped textiles and send the silver with ababa. he must not delay. since ... you do not inform us. if matters are urgent, then do inform us!
thus ennam-aššur, dadiya and hinnāya, say to elamma: 20 minas of silver, its excise added, ir'am-aššur delivered. 2 talents 10 minas of tin under our seals [šu-kūb]um is bringing to you. at 14.3333 shekels : 1 it cost 9 minas 4.1666 shekels of silver. 15 minas of tin for expenses, at 14 1 / 4 shekels: 1 it cost 1 mina 3 shekels of silver. 36 textiles, including those for wrapping cost 2.3333 minas of silver. 22 shekels (of silver) the working capital of šallim-aššur, the harnesser, 2 shekels of silver, one garment for him. two black donkeys cost 38 sheekls of silver. 3 textiles of the harnessor, 4.5 shekels of silver donkey harness. all this šu-kūbum is bringing you. later we will clear accounts and then send your merchandise to you with the next opportunity.""
i entrusted 1 mina of refined silver under my seal to šumi-abiya son of aguwa, and he brings it to ennam-bēlum.
2.5 minas of gold iliya, 2 minas ali-ahum, 2 minas šu-labān, 1.3333 mina kunila, daughter of ennam-aššur, 1.6666 mina , 1 mina 12 shekels ali-ahum and elamma, 1 mina 12 shekels his brother amur-ištar, 1 mina of the of amur-ištar, 1 mina 12 shekels his cash funds, 1.5 mina of his hinnāya, 3.5 minas , 3 minas , 2 minas , 3 3 / 4 minas elamma - in all 27.83333 minas 1 shekel of gold enters the joint-stock fund of elamma. of the profit he will enjoy one third, one third he will guarantee. in 10 years he will render account. who asks for his investment before its due date will receive 4 minas per (mina of gold). 1500 measures of barley, 2 slaves, the share (in the inheritance) and (what is in) the varioius 'pots' - all this is my available capital. eponymy of ibni-adad, son of baqqunum.
1 shekel iddin-abum 1.5 shekel hubuzi 1.3333 shekel šu-bēlum 1 shekel susāya 1.5 shekel adad-ellat 2 shekels ennāniya 2 shekels aššur-šamšī 1 shekel ennam-aššur, son of aššur-šamšī 2 shekels puzur-adad 1 shekel puzur-ištar 1 shekel uṣur-ša-aššur 1 shekel mannu-kī-aššur 0.6666 shekel amur-suen 1 shekel šu-anum 1.5 shekel kušmum 1 shekel adad-bāni 1 shekel šallim-aššur 1 shekel ennam-aššur, son of suen-nādā 1 shekel ṭāb-aššur 1 shekel the son of suettata.
seal of aššur-ṣululī, son of šu-labān, seal of aššur-mālik, son of šu-labān. this tablet contains
from bēliya to ennam-aššur and ištar-bāštī: two worth x talents (of copper) each, two and wool from within the house - in all 9 talents 40 minas of wool are available. to ennam-aššur: my dear brother, when we were on the journey you said as follows to me: i shall lead the donkeys with the goods. write a tablet to your maid and me so i can have your wool carried to you." my dear brother, have the wool carried here, and i personally will be in your debt for the cost of carriage. if the sacks with copper ... give ... silver ... give of your own funds, and buy a ."
from anah-ištar to ab-šalim: as for the undergarment that you sent, aššur-šamšī sent you its price in silver. ask the maid there if she knows the man who brought the silver. i personally seized the man here, saying: buy a slave-girl for my daughter!" he answered: "i shall buy one in kanesh." send me word if he has not bought one. i gave 3 shekels of silver to your husband. did he or did he not give it to you? from hadītum to ab-šalim: as for the undergarment that you sent with ilī-uṣrannī, iddin-šamaš brings you 3 shekels of silver, its price. from anah-ištar to ab-šalim: iddin-šamaš brings you 1 shekel of silver. we are well. the tablet you sent was not cleared. we have heard nothing."
to amurrum-bāni, aššur-imittī, ṣilulu, aššur-dan, šar-adad, puzur-aššur and ennam-aššur from šalim-aššur; specifically to puzur-aššur: when you went down to the city i said: abu-šalim has taken silver from my silver in exchange and given it to you to carry out purchases, and your name is indicated on the tablet." since you received my silver, i seized you and set witnesses for you as you left for the city, saying: "do not release the silver or the merchandise bought with it to anyone." i was ready to lead you to the gate of the god but pūšu-kēn and my friends kept warning me so i did not lead you there. i thought: "he is a brother and a friend to me." but today you take me for a non-gentleman, since you have released the goods you led out of the city for my silver to šu-bēlum and enna-suen, iddin-abum's sons. my dear brother and son, i am not a man of strife, so you must take care to give the goods wherever you handed it over ... to my representatives."
5 shekels for imdī-ilum, 0.5 shekel for the priest, 1 / 6 shekel for the singer, 1 / 8 shekel for the barber, 1 / 8 shekel for... ... ... ... ... .
to ennānum, man-mahir and ali-ahum from ennam-aššur: as i sent a missive to my father's representatives you too should listen to it, since šu-kūbum here has sworn in uraya, amurrum-bāni, adad-ellat, ahu-waqar and idnaya as witnesses for our father. when he had these men sit down to conclude their case (and they have indeed concluded it), then for the deposits that šalim-aššur has sent to the city and on which he has not realised a profit of even one or two minas of silver for himself, (and) the x 0.5 mina x shekels of iron, belonging to them both, that šu-kūbum sent into purušhaddum, (and) of the proceeds from the iron he realised no silver value for himself - (on this) šu-kūbum will swear on aššur's dagger, and our father will pay him x minas 2 shekels of silver, both his expenses and ...these matters never ... amurrum-bāni for us both ... and for these matters take care there and lead these men into the house and remind them; take their tablet in the gate of the god, and send me word. my dear lords, take care! amur-ištar son of aššūr-imittī owes me 31.3333 shekels of refined silver. i hold his certified tablet. his terms are overdue by 2 months. further, he took 16 shekels of silver from the silver in purušhaddum ... make him pay the silver and its interest. if ... his tablet ...
seal of adida; to bēlum-bāni, anupiya and aluwa.
i gave 4.5 shekels of silver for the payment of his fees to aluwa.
1.3333 mina of silver from the silver of abu-salim, son of ennam-suen, which hut-x ... gave to anah-ili, son of tab-silli-assur, and for which he drew up a valid record and in which tablet, sealed by anah-ili, either the name of abu-salim or simply "the creditor" is indicated - with the silver and the interest on it, of the afore-mentioned tablet, assur-malik, son of kurara, kuliya, son of ali-abum, and su-belum, son of puqidi, the representatives of assur-tab, son of abu-salim, are satisfied. the tablet of the debt of anah-ili that may turn up is invalid. if ever anah-ili should raise a claim against assur-malik, kuliya and su-belum, they will bring the valid record of mannum-mu ... and then this tablet will be cancelled. in the presence of istar-tulid, son of adaya, of budaya, son of tarawazi.
their case concerning šalim-aššur - šu-bēlum for the wife of issu-arik, the daughter of issu-arik and the daughter of iddin-abum, the attorney and šu-bēlum swore an oath on the city with šalim-aššur and their case was concluded: for the goods, the tin and textiles that have been entrusted in aššur-bēl-awātim's house in accordance with the verdict of the city assembly šu-kūbum and his brother will come and confirm šalim-aššur for the goods, the tin and textiles. aššur-taklāku was the attorney. šu-bēlum, the wife of issu-arik, the daughter of issu-arik and the daughter of iddin-abum must not raise claim to these goods against šalim-aššur, šu-kūbum or his brother. if they do raise claim, šu-bēlum and the attorney will clear them. witnessed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by aššur-idī son of mumulānum, by šu-kūbum son of aššur-idī, by šumma-libba-aššur son of kuskusum.
say to unapše, this is what abduata says: šu-anum ... ... ... who ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... of his silver of outstanding claims, about which you settled accounts for me in mamma. separately, call for / obtain the textiles according to what he promised you, so that we can sell the textiles. and also, as concerns my silver for the -textiles, after you have fixed the price for him, listen to what he has to say and if you aim at him establishing brotherhood with you, then write every word your hear from his mouth, for me on a tablet and send it me secretly. abdu says / said: 'please, my father, i can do a man a favor, i will do wahtever you will write me. over there, stand up for my case and let me enjoy (your) favor!' the tablet you must give to a scribe who understands šubarian so that he can read it.""
30 minas of šikku-copper and 2 shekels of refined silver is owed by elāli son of karwaya.
to ennam aššur from anna-anna: our enna-suen came and said: who lives here as ennam-aššur's representative?" we went to itūr-ilī, and enna-suen said to itūr-ilī: "why have you forgotten the goods of the merchant that come with me? if you wish, together with my own goods ... the merchant ..." i said to enna-suen: "let your goods and those of the merchant go together, in addition to your own goods." enna-suen answered: "a man representing your master should stand up and then i shall set witnesses so that they may go together with my own goods." travellers ... that i personally ... that you wrote me, that you treated me well, (yet) here you have not 1 mina of silver for me. you said: "... ennam-...""
to kukuwa, šar-suen, agiya and ennam-aššur from ilī-dan; specifically to ennam-aššur: my dear brother, why have you written as follows: wool ... who ... a favour ..." the original tablet ... the tablet ... will return ... of our case. as long as the tablet concerning 45 minas of silver has not been invalidated i shall not show you any favours. after the tablet concerning 45 minas of silver has been invalidated i shall show you my favours, and then i shall bring the wool safely to tukubtu. i deposited my share, and ... talhat. no-one can go down from šadahar to harabet. god forbid that you should send your servant and that you should be angry because something was done in the central country. i am personally not involved. may these men know this indeed!"
sealed by lamassī; to ennam-aššur and al-ahum, the sons of šalim-aššur.
1 jar of wheat, 2 jars of beer-bread, 1 mina of copper, 1 mina of (copper) owed by peruwa; it has not been transferred to his tablet.
to man-mahir from ennam-aššur: before your message arrived i made ṭāb-ṣill-aššur pay 11 talents of good copper which he owed to you, and also 3 talents 10 minas of good copper which annina owed to you. as to the 1 mina 10.3333 shekels of silver which was owed to annina - i paid the silver myself before your message arrived and i obtained your debt-note. ... this ... which i took ... copper that you owe to ..., of the good copper that they ... in ... he seized from the hands of the investors and for interest ... the copper stands at an exchange rate of 100:1 for the -copper. we seized iddin-aššur's son, ennam-aššur and damiq-pī-aššur and i paid 11 talents 15 minas of good copper to the investors, and took your tablet and together with 20 minas of good copper that aššur-bāni owes to you i entrusted it ... further, x minas ... that you owed to annina i entrusted to lila with the tablet ...
sealed by akuza, by lalum, by šu-kūbum son of azu, by aššur-imittī son of ikūn-pi-ištar, by itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar. the tablet from the gate of the god with their testimony from before aššur's dagger.
the attorney of šalim-aššur's house, ennam-aššur, ṣilliya, al-ahum's representative, and iddin-aššur seized us and we concluded their case, ... 40 talents of good copper ... their shares ... he will not raise claim against ennam-aššur and ali-ahum, šalim-aššur's sons. if man-mahir has received 11 talents of good copper from ṭāb-ṣill-aššur's debt as per his certified tablet, the copper and ... šalim-aššur ...
to ikūn-pīya and erišum from ennam-aššur; specifically to erišum: my dear brother, an order from our father arrived about sending some 10 minas of silver. i lent you 4 minas of refined silver against interest, from the week of enah-ilī, month mahhur-ilī, eponymy aššur-nādā, and i have your tablet in my possession. you must pay interest at the rate of 1 shekel per mina per month. 18 weeks have passed for you. further, i lent you 3 minas of refined silver against interest, from the week of amurrum-bāni, month ša-sarrātim. you must pay interest at the rate of 0.83333 shekel per month per mina; eponymy ikūn-pi-ištar. 5(+x) weeks have passed for you. you hold 1.3333 mina 5 shekels of refined silver, the proceeds from my goods. further, i gave you my and 0.5 mina of silver. my dear brother and lord, for all this, the silver and its interest ...seal the silver and send it to your representatives and to me, so i may release the silver with your tablets. make the silver arrive in 10 days so we can gladden our father's spirit. is my father not also your father? save me.
... ...-bum son of ... for his son. 2 ... the son of itūr-ilī. 2 shekels: ... son of the king. 1.5 shekel for ... son of anninum. 3 shekels: šu-suen son of aššur-malik.
i gave 9 shekels of silver to enna-suen when he ... to the city.
... you said: ... of ali-ahum ... is available ... kikkiya's son came from ... and then ... you ... the tin.
from pilah-ištar to aššur-taklāku and ennam-aššur; specifically to ennam-aššur: i keep hearing that you are going to the city. with respect to the tablet that was written in the name of a merchant and is with you, point out where you left this tablet with your representatives and then write the names of your representatives in your message, and if it was not for him the silver ... to you. do you not keep hearing that there is warfare in šalatuwar and within the city itself there is a revolt in their assembly, and ... he keeps committing sins ... they have come back to sin ... approach them there ... i and you ... in the tablet that was written in the name of a merchant, not a single or two months must be overdue so interest ... he hit do not make in a single day.
alulur and his son received 1 talent of good copper. the rate in silver: 61 to 1.
when kura led šalim-aššur to the gate of the god because of the silver of the partnership that the man from tumliya owed, ali-ahum stood with the shareholders in the gate of the god. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave a tablet before aššur's dagger in the gate of the god. witnessed by akuza, by amurrum-bāni, by buzuzum, by lā-qēp.
3 shekels of silver: lā-qēp son of šu-aššur;
from ... to ...: ... the merchant 48 textiles ... 8 minas ... 2 talents 10 minas of tin ... shekels less 22.5 grains ... 8 minas ... owned by ... 13 minas 10 shekels ... of your votive offerings ... 18.5 minas of expense-tin; we gave 0.3333 mina 4.6666 shekels of silver for a driver and half a driver for the carriage; 3 black donkeys cost 1 mina if silver; 2 textiles belonging to aššur-bēl-awātim for his free loan. puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan leads all this to you. he received 1.5 shekels of silver for the ; we gave 3 shekels of silver for the inn in qaṭṭara where they guarded the goods; bēlum-bāni received 0.3333 mina less 1 shekel of silver; additions; bēlum-bāni received 1.5 shekel of silver for the transport tariff of the missing silver. your gold was sold at the rate 9 1 / 4 to 1. of the 10 minas of silver, its import duty added, that you sent, 5 shekels of silver was too little for the import duty; we gave 10 shekels of silver as export duty. 11 shekels of silver, either sacks or harness for the donkeys we shall clear, and a message from us will come to you.
of 51 dark textiles of iddin-suen, 8 textiles were for wrapping, 5 were import-tax and they will balance him 7 shekels of silver, 4 textiles for pre-emption. the rest of his textiles amounts to 34 [dark tex]tiles.
elamma and aššur-nādā seized us and we passed the following verdict for them: ali-ahum and aššur-nādā will establish who of them is liable and if the textiles prove to be owed by aššur-nādā, aššur-nādā ,son of ernu''id ,will pay 0.6666 mina of silver to elamma". witnessed by āmur-aššur ,son of išme-ilum. these gentlemen were the judges."
ennam-aššur son of šu-illil seized us against lā-qēp and ennam-aššur son of šu-bēlum, and ennam-aššur said: have you taken 4.5 minas 5.3333 shekels of silver on behalf of itūr-ilī?" lā-qēp and ennam-aššur answered: "yes, we took the silver in the week of puzur-ištar son of šu-ilabrat. the silver goes overland (to assur) in the name of ennam-aššur son of šu-illil, and ennam-aššur son of šu-illil answers for (possible) shortfalls." ennam-aššur son of šu-illil said: "and the tablet concerning the debt to itūr-ilī and kakkuwa, who will give me that?" lā-qēp answered: "i shall personally give it to you." lā-qēp (further) said to ennam-aššur son of šu-ilil: "you have been paid the silver. you have in your possession 2 certified tablets concerning the debt of my brother aššur-ṭāb. yours as well as that of karriya's son, who will give that to me?" ennam-aššur son of šu-illil answered: "i shall personally give it to you." witnessed by ali-abum son of suliya, by kiliya son of ennānum. the durhumit colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave a tablet with our testimony before aššur's dagger."
[seal of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... and ] [seal of ... ... ... ... ... ... ...] [to lamassitim]
from akkadiya to aššur-malik: why have you taken a wife in marriage? as for me, should i handle(?) her father here? her father shames me; fall at his feet and honour him. give him a thin textile.
0.5 mina 3 shekels of lapis lazuli plus 4 textiles that šu-bēlum and aluwa brought to you, give the corresponding amount in silver yourself, and send it with my servants under your seal. my servants must not delay a single day, send them. concerning the copper ... that i seized in the office of the colony and let stand for alulaya and pilah-ištar - if the copper stands in the office of the colony, then let kuziziya receive the copper in the office of the colony as much as he can acquire, let him seal the copper and then let it remain with one of you. i shall send you the final report.
from pilah-ištar to ennam-aššur: here you instructed me about the 6.83333 minas of silver that i owe to the merchant, and you said: whatever silver falls to you, do not set that aside to any other person; pay it to alulaya on behalf of the merchant." before 15 days had gone by silver fell into my hands, but alulaya was not here, so the silver remains to this day under his seal. 2 or 3 times i have sent word to you, and i have sent you oral messages, and you answered: "let the silver remain in your possession." you certainly know that the silver has been held up for 4 months in your name. tomorrow i shall leave. i have left the silver with my representative."
to aššur-malik, šišara, ištar-lamassī and aššur-dan from šalim-aššur: ... brings you 10 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, under my seal. ... a tablet ... further, i personally gave him 0.5 mina ..., x+3 sacks of barley and wheat, and 1 litre of olive oil. you (fem. pl.) said: ... a journey ..." buy grain for this silver but it must not enter the house of erišum(?). also, when i come i shall return your grain to you (fem. pl.). send me a positive message ahead of my departure and cheer me up! "
to ennam-aššur fom amur-ištar: here (...) the traveling party has been stopped on the way to šalatuwar. i am staying in wahšušna. until the matter of šalatuwar has been cleared up, wašanalam has left for šalatuwar. send me word and decide what there is to decide for me. if the matter is cleared up, i shall enter in accordance with your instructions.
the house in kanesh, the house of hinnaya, where ili-bani lies buried, should that house become kuliya's property, then for the 24 shekels of silver that ennum-assur paid as price for this house to puzur-assur, ennum-assur will produce withnesses against kuliya and kuliya will pay to ennum-assur 0.5 mina of silver. should kuliya not acquire that house, then ennum-assur will sue the resident of that house for his silver. in the presence of assur-taklaku, son of karways, of urad-assur, son of watrum.
the colony has passed a verdict, stating that of the 2.5 talents 7 minas of silver, 1 mina of gold and 4 -textiles the recipient of iddin-abum's silver will deduct the tithe of the king (from) šalim-aššur. then they will discuss in a court of merchants. if the silver is insufficient for the tithe, šalim-aššur will deposit (what is missing).
seal of ilī-rē'ī, seal of ilī-dān, son of amur-ištar. 10.3333 shekels of refined silver ilī-dān owes to elamma. he will pay the silver in the city.
to ali-ahum and damqaya; seal of šāt-anna.
5 minas 3 shekels for šalim-bēli; 3.5 minas of copper for firewood; 1 mina i myself took; 0.83333 mina for small jars when amur-suen came here; 0.5 mina i paid to šallim-aššur; 25 shekels for a small jar when i invited šu-kūbum and šallim-aššur
10 minas of refined silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, belonging to elamma, ali-ahum has entrusted to kudādum and he has brought it to erra-ilī and kudādum for making purchases, to buy tin. the silver belongs to elamma. 10 minas of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid for, belonging to elamma, ali-ahum entrusted to ali-abum and he brought it to ali-abum!, šuli and erra-ilī. in the presence of šu-kūbum, son of qa'atum, of aššur-nādā, son of aššur-idī. 12 textiles elamma gave to ali-ahum as a free loan in the presence of aššur-nādā (and) of la-qēp.
i am entitled to a share of 1.5 mina of silver in the holding (and) to 45 shekels of in the one-third parts of the caravan of aššur-karwa and aššur-imittī.
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: i already sent you my instructions. i left 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver with ennānum son of abiya in purušhaddum - if ennānum is present make him pay the silver and send it here. if he is absent, entrust 1 mina of silver of your own to your servant and elāli so they can bring it here. elāli brings you 2.5 shekels of silver for small goods. send me 3 pairs of good women's shoes. do not send me bronze pins. the slave kalka brings 1.5 litre of first-quality (oil), a belt and a girdle and -spice to you.
to ennānum, adida, and ali-ahum from bēlum-bāni: give 1 talent of my copper to šalim-aššur and set witnesses for him. since he is to return my 1 talent of copper to me in wahšušana, why is it that i keep hearing that šu-kūbum is arguing with you, saying: my terms are still running." i gave it to him for x weeks from the month teʾinātum, eponymy aššur-malik. his terms are overdue by two months. seize him and make him pay x 0.5 mina of silver. if he objects, ... all this ... make ... pay ..."
1.5 mina of silver is owed by habuala and tarikuda;
i previously gave you 2 kutānu-textiles for 0.3333 mina 2 shekels of silver with kizi and your servant as witnesses.
[thus] ali-ahum, [aššur]-rēṣī, ennam-aššur, [and] dadiya say to elamma: 24 minas 24? shekels of silver, [thereof] we gave 61 shekels of silver as excise; the rest of your silver is 23! minas and 24 shekels. 33 shekels of gold aššur-ṭāb brought us, thereof we gave as excise 1 3 / 8 shekel. it was 0.3333 shekel less when we checked it, (so) the rest of the gold is 31.3333 shekels, its equivalent in silver at 1: 5 1 / 4 is 2 3 / 4 minas. total of your silver, including the yield of the gold: 26 minas 9 shekels of silver. 4 talents 20 minas 8 shekels of tin under seals, 30 minas hand tin, at 17 1 / 4 shekels per (shekel of silver), its (price in) silver, 16 minas 4[9 shekels]; 36 tiles [at 5.83333 shekels apiece], their (price in) silver 3.5 minas; 33 dark textiles including those for wrapping, their silver 1 mina 44 shekels. the silver became 55 shekels less by washing. 5 black donkeys cost 1 mina 17 shekels; 1 donkey became ill and we bought an extra one and it is coming to you. 1 mina, the working capitals of uzua and šumi-abiya, 4 shekels their clothing, 12 shekels as additional amount we balanced to aššur-ṭāb, 3 shekels for ..., 9 shekels donkey harness, 12.5 shekels export tax, 14 shekels donkey fodder.""
the wages of the hireling abiaya, son of uzua, will compensate; he has been paid 2 shekels (of silver) as his clothing allowance. seal of ennum-assur, son of ikuppiya, seal of aninaya, son of watrum, seal of ennam-assur, son of sulmi-sa-assur. 12 minas of copper ennum-assur, son of ikuppiya, owes to the creditor. reckoning from month x he will pay in one month. if he does not pay he will add an interest of 0.5 mina per 10 minas per month. eponymy of dadiya, son of su-ilabrat. the bearer of the tablet is the creditor. seal of hitani, son of ili-nada, seal of ennum-assur, son of ..., seal of amur-assur, son of isar-kitti-assur, seal of kunnanaya. 2 talents 10 minas of copper, by the local weight standard, kunnanaya owes to kuliya, son of ali-abum. reckoning from month viii, eponymy of assur-re'i, son of ili-emuqi, in conformity with the rule of the karum, he will add an interest of 1.5 mina per talent per month. the slave abi-ili with his fetter, kuliya, son of ali-abum, bought from samas-dugul, son of ibni-adad for 3.5 shekels of 'dust silver'. samas-dugul is satisfied with the silver, the price of abi-ili and his fetter. samas-dugul and his sons will not vidicate abi-ili from kuliya and his sons. in the presence of asqudum, son of assur-bani, of assur-lamassi, son of suen-naqid, of ... -suen, son of amur-istar.
iddin-abum owes 20 minas of refined silver to šu-illil. reckoned from the week of libbaya he must pay in 13 weeks. if he has not paid (in time), he must add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. if they write his tablet before his term is up, he shall book 5 minas of gold in the name of šu-illil. witnessed by amur-ištar, by ennam-aššur.
thus iddin-aššur, say to elamma and ali-ahum, in particular to ali-ahum: 1 mina of silver for which you drew up saliya's debt-note, let saliya give you that 1 mina of silver and as for the rest of the silver inspect my tablet to (discover) that i have already dunned saliya four times, in order to be able to pay you. please my brother, do me and my sons this favor. i have a creditor, (so) let nobody hear (about it) from your mouth!""
1 litre of oil from hahhum, first quality ..., worth 2 shekels, owed by azutaya son of ememe.
thus ali-ahum, aššur-rēṣī, ennam-aššur and dadiya, say to elamma: 24 minas of silver dān-aššur, son of šalim-ahum, has brought us. 16.6666 minas of silver aššur-nādā, son of aššur-idī, has brought us. in all 40.3333 minas of silver. thereof (we paid) 30 minas we had borrowed from ali-ahum and we added to it 1.6666 mina of silver as interest. there remains of your silver 8.6666 minas. 76 -textiles cost 6 minas [40? shekels] of silver, 3 black donkeys cost [40+x shekels] of silver. 15 minas of [tin for expenses] at 13 shekels : 1, its price in silver 1 mina 9 shekels. the harness of the donkeys <and> the (leather) bags cost 9.5 shekels of silver, 3.6666 shekels of silver we added as additions, 4.3333 shekels the export tax, 2 shekels bēlum-bāni took. 4 -textiles of abu-šalim, 1 textile of aššur-rēṣī, 1 textile of dadiya, 1 textile of bēlum-bāni. all this aššur-nādā leads to you. make bēlum-bāni pay the silver over there.""
our own šu-kūbum paid me 1 mina of silver as part of his debt;
1 drink: aššur-nādā;
to kudātum from nāb-suen and ennam-aššur: in accordance with what you wrote, i listened to your missive here, and i seized him with respect to every mina of silver that ah-šalim owes to you, but he did not give me any silver. seize him when you arrive so he may give you your silver. ... shekels of silver that you sent, ... kuziziya. open the containers on my behalf, take 15 shekels of silver that is under your seal and then irma-aššur will add 15 shekels of silver, and in accordance with your words the tablet that you entrusted to me in wahšušana - the tablet that is among the tablets ... the silver to a... son of sukkalliya ...
in accordance with the verdict of the plenary kanesh colony ennam-ilī, the scribe, seized us wherepon we entered elamma's house and broke the seals of the sealed room and we left (them) in the sealed room. two boxes with tablets akūa, son of b[aziya] took. witnessed by masaya, son of aššur-nimrī, by maṣi-ilī, son of buzuzum, by amur-aššur, son of aššur-ṭāb.
of the 2 minas and 15 shekels of silver which, because of the payment for the house, belum-bani, ennam-suen and peruwa, had obtained from assur-malik, son of kurara, and for which their valid deed had been drawn up, 0.83333 mina thereof belum-bani paid with my silver. for 25 shekels of silver i kept a debt-note and a lot of interest has accreued and he has agreed with me on an amount of 0.83333 mina of silver. 0.5 mina of spoiled silver has been added for me. 21 shekels of silver, the price ofthree kutanu-textiles of current quality that he deposited on belum-bani's account in the karum-office — in all 1.66666 mina and 1 shekel of silver. separately, as for the 1 mina of silver, which on behalf of anah-ili, the son of taki, i guaranteed to assur-tab, son of abu-salim, assur-malik brought me a letter of assur-tab, saying: "at the accounting assur-tab has transferred that silver (claim) to me". all together assur-malik has charged me 2.66666 minas and 1 shekel of silver. in the presence of iddin-suen, son of kukulanum, of su-ishara, son of kurara, of assur-sululi, son of ennam-suen, of assur-bani, the scribe. i had been ordered to make this silver arrive in the city, but after assur-malik had died, i paid 2.66666 minas and 1 shekel of silver in kanesh to su-ishara, son of kurara, kurara, son of assur-malik, and to laban-nada, the attorney, in the presence of amur-samas, son of puzur-ili, of assur-bani, son of the priest of ea-sarrum, of assur-imitti, son of gadubatum, of ennam-assur, son of ennanum, son of kuprurak, (and) of assur-bani, the scribe. the letter addressed to assur-tab concerning the 1 mina of silver they gave me (and) i have a letter of assur-tab in my possession.
seal of dadiya, son of b[azaza]; seal of iddin-abum, ; seal of aššur-šamsī, . 0.6666 mina 5 shekels of refined silver ištar-ilšu, son of [azuzaya], owes to aššur-ṭāb, son of e[lamma]. from the week of hurāṣānum and aššur-mālik, eponymy of alī-ahum, son of [īnah-ilī], he will add 1.5 shekel per mina as interest." "
... my goods, some 9 shekels of silver seize them and then make them pay the silver to you. i left all these tablets in the hands of the maid. demand them from her, act in accordance with my instructions, make them pay and seal what there is to recieve and let it be. my dear brothers, pay attention to my instructions as if i was staying there myself. send me word with humašana whether the silver has been paid or not.
1.5 shekel of tin in the town of buṭnātum i gave to the inn; 6 shekels of tin in the area of hanaknak, where we..., i gave to the inn; 3 shekels of tin, when we left hanigga, i gave to the inn. 3 shekels of tin i gave in wazida to the inn. 6 shekels of tin i gave in hanaknak as import-tax on the textiles 14 shekels of silver as price <of...> i paid. 3 shekels of tin, when i left hanaknak i gave to our inn, while we searched for goods lost; 3 shekels of tin i gave in the town of kupilšan; 1.5 shekel of tin i gave in tapaggaš to the chief; a -bead of tin i gave to the steward of ta'edizina; 0.5 mina of copper i gave for the crossing in the area of durhumit; 3 minas of refined copper, import-tax, in durhumit i gave to the chief; 5 minas of refined copper i put at the disposal of ilī-uṣranni, when he went to wahšušana in pursuit of my textiles; 10 minas of -copper for the inn and expenses inwahšušana.
50 loaves of bread owed by the lower miller of tumliya.
6 minas of refined silver is owed by kulaba, šupun-ahšu and hanunu. 6 minas of refined silver is owed by bēlum-bāni son of kasiya.1.3333 mina of refined silver is owed by amur-ištar son of šalim-aššur. 5 minas of litu-silver is owed by šēp-ištar son of ali-ahum. 1 mina of refined silver is owed by šu-ištar son of šukkutum. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is owed by ennam-adad son of aššur-malik. 6.6666 minas 8 shekels of refined silver is owed by enna-suen son of iddin-abum. 2 minas 10 shekels of refined silver is owed by irišum son of amur-šamaš. 2.5 minas of refined silver is owed by ikūn-pīya son of aššur-bāni. 0.6666 mina of litu-silver is owed by ilališkan and šuppun-ahšu. 2 minas 5 shekels of refined silver is owed by aluwa. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is the working capital of lulu son of aššuriš-tikal. 1 mina of refined silver is the working capital of šu-ištar son of šukkutum. 1 mina of refined silver is owed by šumma-libbi-aššur. 5.5 shekels of refined silver is owed by nannaya. 10 shekels of litu-silver is owed by aššur-rabi son of lā-qēp. 0.6666 mina of refined litu-silver is owed by šu-ištar. 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of litu-silver is owed by ašed and his son adiya. 1.5 mina of refined silver is owed by ilī-muttabbil son of amur-ištar. 20 minas of washed copper is owed by tutaya son of anah-ilī. 1.83333 mina 4 shekels of refined silver is owed by aššur-taklāku son of ikūnum.0.5 mina 1.83333 shekels of litu(-silver) is owed by waldi-ilum son of šu-bēlum. 0.83333 minas of refined silver is owed by amur-aššur son of abiya. 0.5 mina of refined silver is the working capital of ibni-adad.10 shekels of refined silver is owed by ikūn-pī-aššur son of puzur-ištar. 12.5 minas 6 shekels of refined silver is owed by amur-šamaš son of šu-anum.0.5 mina 1.5 shekel of refined silver is owed by abu-šalim. 1 mina 7.5 shekels of silver is owed by atata son of ennānum. 3.83333 minas 5.5 shekels of refined silver is owed by amur-šamaš son of šu-anum. 1.5 mina of refined silver is owed by amur-šamaš son of šu-anum. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is the working capital of kize. 1 mina of refined silver is owed by abu-šalim. 2 minas 16 shekels of lapis lazuli of good quality from the votive offerings for aššur, 45 ordinary kutānus, 30 minas of tin plus 2 black donkeys and their harness has the merchant given to šu-ištar son of šukkutum. 0.5 mina of refined silver is owed šuppun-uman. 10 shekels of refined silver is owed by šu-bēlum son of kuziziya. 2 minas 4 shekels of refined silver is owed by šu-ištar son of aššur-lamassī. 12 shekels of refined silver is owed by ennam-aššur son of erra-idī. 0.5 mina 2.5 shekels of silver is owed by amur-ištar.
41 minas 11.5 shekels of refined silver, sealed by his representatives and by me - in 3 packages; further, 0.6666 mina 1 shekel of silver, its transport tariff - all this i entrusted to šu-nūnu and ilī-ašrannī, and they brought it to šalim-aššur in the city. furthermore, i gave them 5 shekels of silver for their food. witnessed by ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar, by baziya son of ilī-kurub, by aššur-taklāku son of qardaya. furthermore, i gave 10 shekels of silver as a working-capital to šu-nūnu and 7 shekels of silver to ilī-ašrannī witnessed by the same men.
seal of suen-nādā son of ennam-aššur. the kanesh colony gave me for these proceedings and i gave my testimony before aššur's dagger. šu-kūbum son of aššur-idī and iddin-ištar son of aššur-nādā were my (absent) partners.
37 shekels of silver and 2 1 / 4 shekels of gold ištar-lamassī, wife of kūn-ilum, left to lamassutum, wife of elamma. that silver and gold lamassutum, wife of elamma, attended by elamma's son ennam-aššur, entrusted to ennam-aššur, son of aššur-dān, and šumi-abiya, son of amua. in the presence of puzur-aššur, son of ikūn-pīya, of amur-ilī, son of šu-kūbum, of maṣi-ilī, son of buzuzu, of puzur-ištar, son of šu-kūbum.
to ennānum son of abiya and ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur; seal of puzur-aššur.
25 stones owed by enah-ilī.
to ennam-aššur from ali-ahum: my dear brother, send me word there after the matter has been dropped, then i shall act in accordance with your instructions. dispatch 3 donkeys and servants in addition to these donkeys. i shall act in accordance with your instructions.
from kuziziya to ennam-aššur: šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī brought me 2 thin textiles and some lapis lazuli. aššur-emūqī sold your thin textiles in marithum, but he has not brought the proceeds from their sale. when he comes i shall send you the proceeds from them. no silver has fallen into my hands, so i did not send you a corresponding amount. your lapis lazuli is under my seal and šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī bring you 4 ⅓ shekels of gold, also under my seal, the proceeds from the thin textiles belonging to pilah-ištar. ... a sack ... give that to the lady there. i shall send you the silver for it when the servant comes.
per month he will add interest in conformity with the rule of the karum. month v, the eponymy of the successor of abu-salim, the trader, son of ili-alum. seal of amur-assur, son of dadiya, seal of ... son of uzubiskum, seal of ... son of assur-samsi. ... ..., son of assur-samsi owes to the creditor. from ... within ... months he shall pay. if not, he will add interest in conformity with the rule of the karum x ...
as for the 12 shekels of silver, the price of a textile belonging to ennānum, son of azua, which elamma took, elamma declared: i paid the silver to ennānum, the son of akuka, your investor." nanaya said: "at ennānum's behest i took elamma's slave-girl as security, for ennānum told (me): 'go and take his slave-girl [as securtiy]!" any ... [... declared]: "it was at the instruction of ennānum, son of akuka, that nanaya took elamma's slave-girl as security". if elamma has paid the silver to ennānum nanaya will pay 0.5 mina of silver to [elamm]a. [in the presence of ...d]iya, o[f ...], son of šu-ištar, of šu-ištar, son of dadānum."
15 minas of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, karwāya brought to my investors, witnessed by anīnum, son of šu-hubur, by aššuriš-tikal, son of aššur-rē'ī. 15 shekels of gold, its excise added, his transport fee paid, to the address of ennam-aššur, aššur-rēṣì and dadiya. 0.6666 mina of silver, its import tax added, his transport fee paid, for aššur-taklāku, son of lū-rabiāku. 5 shekels of silver for ummī-išhara, her consignment; 4 shekels of silver of lamassatum for ummī-išhara; 1 shekel of silver for buṣua - all this aššur-mūtappil brought; 4 shekels of silver for his use, 3 shekels of silver sāsiya (and) 3 shekels of silver la-qēpum, son of itūr-ilī, brought to ummī-išhara; one ........ the son of kunnaya brought for her. 1 mina of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, for my investors; 6 minas of silver his transport fee paid, for aššur-imittī, son of ikua; 17 minas 8 shekels of silver, its transport fee paid, belonging to me and kurub-ištar to the address of ali-ahum and dadiya - all this šalim-aššur brought, in the presence of šu-kūbum, son of azu, of puzur-šadu'e. 17.5 minas of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, belonging me and kurub-ištar, aššur-nādā brought to ali-ahum and dadiya. 2 shekels of silver for ummī-išhara, in the presence of iṣmid-ilī, of šumi-abiya, son of puzur-aššur.
... and the son of e... dust with ... and correctly is poured over my head. i keep appealing to the city that they should not give an attorney. my dear brothers, the silver of ... for your hands ...
to ali-ahum from hanu: my dear lord, your agents and i seized šu-illil son of mannu-kī-aššur here, we concluded his affair, the debt of his was determined at 1.83333 mina of silver, and we seized him before two witnesses, and i said:pay the silver!" he answered: "dear brothers, i shall pay you the silver in 20 days." we said: "if you have not paid us the silver within 20 days - reckoned from the month qarra'ātum, eponymy maṣi-ilī - will you then not pay interest of 3 shekels per mina?" he answered: "i shall pay the interest." we set witnesses for him. i personally seized the certified tablet. if you are truly my lord, send word here, i hold the tablet with witnesses; i shall certify it, set out and come. the man cheats me. ask aduda there how much the man has spent. "
turhala owes 3 shekels of silver to ennam-aššur, and he will add 30 large bundles of reeds within 5 days. reckoned from the week of mannum-balum-aššur he will pay my silver in the next week. if he has not paid (in time) he will continue to add interest every month at the rate 0.5 shekel (per mina). witnessed by lamassī daughter of ah-šalim.
... i entrusted. ... you have brought the house of ... in order. set out and leave. as to the property of the merchant, i have not sold it in the city. ... approach me. as to your father's house, the nis'u of ikūn-pīya's door has fallen down and today the annexe will fall, and he will blame me. whom will i have? my heart has made it known. my own depression fills me. aššur-malik's house ... the house of ...
to šu-tammuzi, ... šalim-aššur ... from šalim-aššur: ... to the city ... the investors ... seized ... and they said: ... 0.5 mina of silver i paid to ...; 0.5 mina less 2 shekels of silver to šu-aššur, the priest, and pušqānum, his son; i paid 0.3333 mina to ikūn-piya son of ikuwa, 0.3333 mina 3 shekels of silver to elabaya, 12 shekels to ṣill-adad, 10 shekels to the wife of kukidi. i paid 15 shekels to dan-ilī, 15 shekels to šūmam-nirši - in all 14 minas less 5 shekels of silver. when ... 3 minas of silver, the house of šu-... silver, kurara's son ... 7 minas of silver, the house ... silver, adawa...'s son ... amur-ištar - in all 30 ... before you ...
to šalim-aššur from ennam-aššur: from the copy of your outstanding loans that you left with me i have received 5 minas of silver from ilī-dan; i received 3.83333 minas 5 shekels from amur-šamaš, 10.5 mina from dādiya; for 4 minas of silver that enna-suen owed to you (i got) 2.5 minas as interest and 0.5 mina as expenditures - in all i received 7 minas of silver from enna-suen; 0.6666 mina 8? shekels owed by itūr-ilī, 1.5 mina owed by kukuwa, 5 minas owed by the man of tumliya, 1 mina owed by ušhata's son - total of your silver: 27.5 minas 3 shekels that i received from your outstanding loans. thereof i paid 10.5 minas 5 shekels to azu's firm; i made purchases for 3 minas of silver, and i have deposited textiles on your account in the colony office, and i have booked you for 5.5 minas 7.5 shekels in the colony; they made you pay 12 minas of silver, the complete fees, and i deducted 5.5 mina 7.5 shekels so they made me pay 6.3333 minas 2.5 shekels of refined silver. i paid 3 minas to ilī-bāni son of yaya, and he produced the tablet concerning 5 minas sworn by the city; i gave 1 mina of silver as the transport tariff for 1 talent of silver transported by šu-ištar; 0.5 mina i deposited for your 3 servants; i paid 0.83333 mina for 5 -textiles when i gave šāt-anna (in marriage); i paid 23 shekels to pilah-aššur and 10 shekels of silver to uṣur-ša-aššur; i gave 4 shekels of silver as the transport tariff for the votive offerings i sent with dan-aššur to you; the rest of your silver: 1 mina 33.5 shekels of silver; i gave that for small goods.
to aššuriš-tikal, ikūn-pīya and iddin-abum from ennam-aššur; specifically to ikūn-pīya: when you stayed here i lent you 5 talents of washed, good, broken copper ... you are like a father to me, i shall not put you to shame and i have not refused you anything. here you appointed puzur-šamaš son of šu-nūnu for me in order to pay the copper in 15 days, but until today he has not paid any copper to me. also, in the presence of your own servants i have quarrelled with him five or ten times, and your servants observe this. i said: let puzur-šamaš have the copper paid so i can do the man a favour, and since i shall give him the earnings from 2 minas of silver may this man indeed know about this favour!" puzur-šamaš has troubled me here, led me to the colony and put me to an expense of at least 5 shekels of silver, so i got hold of a tablet with my witnesses, stating that without reason he spoke your name ... before the plenary assembly. he said: "what silver does ikūn-pīya have as a claim on me?" i said: "i have answered you. therefore i have taken a tablet with witnesses ... if ... from the month ... to ikūn-pīya: i was unhappy with respect to your goods that you gave to adad-ṣulūlī and the son of šu-nūnu, so i wrote you. you must decide yourself about your goods. "
16 shekels of refined silver puzur-ištar owes to the creditor. reckoned from month x, eponymy year of akūtum, he will pay within 5 months. if he does not pay he will add interest in accordance with the regulation of the colony. the hand of the creditor rests on 2 -textiles. in the presence of ennam-aššur, son of uṣāriya, of enna(m)-suen, son of ennam-aššur
0.6666 mina 5 shekels of refined silver ištar-ilšu, owes to aššur-ṭāb, son of elamma. from the week of hurāṣānum and aššur-mālik, eponymy of alī-ahum, son of īnah-ilī, he will add 1.5 shekel per mina as interest. i will take the silver wherever i see him.
ilī-bāni son of yaya and the slave abu-šalim seized us in burušhaddum in order to settle accounts, and ilī-bāni said: i act on behalf of šalim-aššur. come on, settle with these men as witnesses." they placed their tablets concerning deposits before us, and ilī-bāni said: "you cheated the boss for goods worth 5 talents of silver or more. consequently, on this very matter you have made the boss very angry." they took away the accounts in our presence, and ilī-bāni said: "submit whatever you have in your possession." abu-šalim answered: "apart from 40 minas of silver there is nothing left in my possession." ilī-bāni said: "now, were goods worth 5 talents of silver or more not booked for you in his tablet?"abu-šalim produced -documents and said: "here, are they not his -documents from the house of the queen of amkuwa, the sister of the king of šašasama? also, i have listened to the orders of the palace here. take them so that you yourselves can have them sold." ilī-bāni answered: "i shall keep in mind what was sworn by the city, that the accounts have been removed and i have not settled anything." abu-šalim said: "i shall go and clear myself with my master." ilī-bāni said: "give at least 0.5 mina of gold for the girl's ears." he answered: "i have nothing available." the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by šu-kūbum son of aššur-idī, by iddin-ištar son of aššur-idī; suen-nādā son of ennam-aššur was our (absent) partner."
to šāt-anna, lulu and nazi from anna-anna: if lulu and nabi-illil have come from zalpa, then seize them and make (them) pay 42 shekels of silver. i should not arrive here and get angry. if šabanātum, kuziziya's wife, wishes to leave for wahšušana, (and) you have given her a sack of barley (and) a sheep, (then) after lulu pays the silver, at least 40 shekels, they should give you 3 shekels, the price of a sheep.
tablets with oaths by the city.
to ennam-aššur from amur-ištar: in accordance with your instructions that you sent me i have here once or twice informed man-mahir, and he said: you are many sons of the man. let ennam-aššur come, take your silver and then i shall transfer the tablet with your seals to ennānum, the representative of ... ilī ... and to what is mine and ... 23 shekels of silver šalim-wardī brings to you under my seal. 3 shekels of silver, owed by ali-ahum; 2.5 minas of washed (copper): damqaya. my dear father and lord, if it were not for you i would have no father. travel here so you personally now may seize hold of every mina of silver of your assets. i gave 10 minas of copper to hanu for purchases. i did not obtain copper here. he said: "i shall sell it in durhumit. 10 minas of washed copper ...""
from ikūn-pīya, dan-aššur, šalim-wardī and šu-nūnu to ennam-aššur: 50 -textiles, 25 minas of tin, 0.3333 mina 0.6666 shekel of silver, 2 black donkeys - all this you sent. thereof 25 were sold at 13 minas each, 25 were sold at 12 minas each, 18 minas of tin at 10 minas each, 4 minas less 15 shekels at 9 minas each were sold; the rest of your tin, 3 minas 15 shekels, they bring to you. 55 minas was the price of your donkeys, 31 minas the price of the silver in dan-aššur's possession - the total of your copper: 15 talents 24.6666 minas of washed copper. thereof šu-nūnu earlier brought you 6 talents; šalim-wardī and šu-nūnu bring you 8 talents of washed copper under our seals. 18 minas good copper we paid as the transport tariff on your copper and your donkeys; 1 mina per talent was lost during the breaking up; 2.5 minas of good copper we deposited out of your copper and gave to ab-šalim for the carriage of ab-šalim's and dan-aššur's copper. we did not give them anything for expenses and food. your copper ... the rest of your copper ... i shall credit to you. the bead of gold you sent to the girl was broken and therefore she would not receive it. they bring it to you under our seals.
6.5 shekels 22.5 grains of pašallu-gold at the rate 1:10 in silver, and further, 4 black donkeys and their harness i gave to šēp-ištar and lullu.
from ikūn-pīya to ennam-aššur: make the priestess who lives opposite kura's house hear the missive from aššur-malik; also, do give her the boxwood log; since i gave you a memorandum, make the jewelry and ask there whether the missive from the man or from our guest-house has come, and send it to me. my dear brother, pay heed to my message.
for 1 mina 2 shekels of tin šu-kūbum became indebted to me. this memo is a later one.
... dan-aššur son of šalim-ahum ... šalim-aššur has taken a donkey owned by us both; he has ... 0.3333 mina of silver of his own funds. ... of the that šu-ištar son of dadānum conducted here, pūšu-kēn has given me 6 on his own. aduda and šu-ištar sent them.
to ir'am-aššur and šamaš-bāni, and in particular to ir'am-aššur, say as follows, thus ennam-aššur: previously i sent you 2 minas 57 shekels of silver from hattum with šu-suen and i thought: 'he is my father, he will go and send me from the city at least 10 minas of tin and thereby encourage me. and when some silver becomes available for me i will then be able to send silver to my creditor on the basis of my tablet'. but you said: 'your sister needed the silver, so i gave it to her on the basis of your tablet'. later, when you were about to set out on a journey, you said: 'give me every single shekel of silver you have available then i will buy for you and send you tin, 10 minas, so that you can obtain silver and gather courage!' you also said: 'you must also exert yourself for my textiles and salvage them as well as you can. the textiles must not get lost!' when you left, did you not know that the roads and the palaces were causing difficulties? until i had salvaged the textiles i stayed seven months in the interior. three textiles were spent for the expenses of the trip, but i managed to ship the textiles under kulumaya's seals to your representatives. the textiles are badly affected by moth and have been sold for (only) 3.5 minas silver. the silver, under the seals of your [representative, is available. please, my father, my boss, to whom else but you can i look (for help)? i collected every single shekel i had available and [1 mina 14 shekels of silver, its excise added, its transport fee paid, and separately 0.5 mina of silver, temple funds of aššur, i gave you in the presence of azutāya and of idi-bāni in hurama for making purchases <<in the presence of azutāya and of idī-bāni>> and i said: 'please my father, my boss, buy for me tin, 10 minas, and send it to me and so allow me to face aššur and and you!' what misdeed have i committed against you that until this very day you fail to send me the tin? send me the tin bought with my silver!""
to ali-ahum from amur-ištar: concerning huma about whom i wrote to you, my terms for starting a legal case have one month to run, but you keep sending me a copy of my witnessed tablet. your message should - on the very day you hear my missive - your message should come. azu must not be delayed a single day! - your message should come! if it is a matter of engaging in a legal case, i shall do it! if it is a matter of remitting the house, i shall do it! annina knows the matter. ask annina there! 4 talents 30 minas of black copper is deposited in the house of aššuruš-tikal son of hinnaya. send me word about the orders that he holds.
elamma and galdaya settled accounts with the result that after both travel expenses and his food allowance have been deducted, elamma (still) has a claim of 1 mina of refined silver on galdaya, the son of naku. from the week of amriya and ikūnum he will add 1.5 shekel per mina per month. month vii, year-eponymy of abiya, son of šu-dagan. separately, there still exists a valid record of his working capital. we made them swear an oath by the city for these words.
to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: travellers reached us at buhitar(?) and i questioned (them) concerning the son of sadaya. ... the city ... they went to the city and ... they will bind ... for 6 months ... šalim-aššur ... they came ... sadaya ...
1 mina 6 shekels of refined silver elamma owes to imdī-ilim, month ix eponymy of šudāya, son of ennānum. elamma declared: one has brought the 1 mina 6 shekels, your silver, to amur-ištar". elamma will confirm amur-ištar('s liability) for imdī-ilum and if he has confirmed that amur-ištar has the silver in his possession, amur-ištar shall pay the silver and the interest on it to imdī-ilum. if elamma fails to confirm amur-ištar('s liability) for imdī-ilum, elamma will pay the silver and the interest on it to imdī-ilum. in the presence of amur-šamaš, of lā-qēpum."
šu-ištar and ennam-suen seized us and ennam-suen said: the silver for which we had ourselves registered as guarantors of al-ṭāb concerning the kilirians, pay that silver". šu-ištar answered: "within 6 months, in accordance with the ruling of my city, i will come and render account to you". ennam-suen said: "if you do not come to tawiniya within 6 months and do not render account to me, will you then not give me the silver and its interest without resorting to legal action or oath?" šu-ištar answered: "i will give it to you". for these words the tawiniya colony made us appear in court and before aššur's dagger we gave this tablet. witnessed by ištar-bāni, by šimatānum, by zul / niya; mannum-balum-aššur, son of dunniya, was our fourth man."
seal of adad-ellat, seal of ir'am-aššur, son of idi-bāni, seal of pilah-ištar, son of ibisua, to the effect that āl-ṭāb owes 12 shekels of silver to kurub-suen and ennam-suen is guarantorthe 12 shekels of silver instead of ... ...
2 minas of silver instead of 4 minas of unsealed silver from the entrusted goods that i received from e...
to kuliya, son of ali-abum, tablet of iddin-abum, son of šu-ištar, priest of ištar. say to kuliya. thus says iddin-abum: 10 shekels of silver for which urdum, our servant, and ennum-ilī had become indebted to puzur-aššur, son of ahu-waqar - if i deliver to you a letter of ataya, stating that you have settled accounts and have collected that silver, will you then release to me the letter with my seal?" kuliya answered: "if you do not deliver to me that letter you shall pay me 10 shekels of silver.""
from alulaya and amur-ištar to ennam-aššur: you have written and said: man-mahir shall give you the silver proceeds from the copper." we said (to him): "he is a brother for you. the matter of the investors of their father has been cleared up. send him some 10 or 20 minas of silver so he can place them before his father's investors and he will be respected." he answered: "i shall not send him anything until they sell my things." we confronted him and said: "our dear brother, you and ennam-aššur are not men of strife. if the things are not entrusted goods, then keep the lapis lazuli. we shall then answer for you. we guaranteed when the journey began for as much as you are suing šalim-aššur's sons for." so he said: "i shall send some 10 minas." later your brother's missive arrived, in which he said: "it is against me he has raised claim." (he has) no witness. do not in any way worry about the copper and the lapis lazuli. come so you and man-mahir may meet and šalim-wardī and šēp-ištar bring the final account for the proceeds from your tin, 2 minas 22.5 shekels of silver to you."
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: kulumaya should give you 7 shekels of silver; šu-bēlum son of kutaya should give you 12 shekels of tin; šu-suen, the scribe, should give you 1 shekel of silver and 2 shekels of tin; lā-qēp son of puzur-šadūʾe should give you 19 shekels of silver. buy for 1 shekel of silver women's shoes, for 1 shekel shoes for children and send them. send me shoes for my own feet. send the rest of the silver. kulumaya brings you 1 fine textile; send me the proceeds from it.
seal of iddin-aššur, son of ilī-dān, seal of aššur-rē'ī, son of idida, seal of elamma, son of iddin-suen, seal of puzur-ištar, son of aššur-mālik. testament of iddin-aššur, son of ilī-dān. they shall not lead my testamentary executors down to the gate of the god. who does lead them down shall pay 10 minas of silver.
from ikūn-pīya to puzur-šadue: as to the 2 i gave you, sell them and buy 6 minas of good copper and 2 minas of sickles for the proceeds from them, and then confirm the -silver for the rest, and with the very first caravan you should entrust a servant and the silver to an affiliated trader so he may bring it. buy onions and for 0.3333 shekel of silver and send it to me. my dear brother, pay attention to my agent! sell my textiles and then demand in silver from ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur what corresponds to the pledges that have been deposited, so he may give it to you, and bring personally the silver, both the proceeds in silver from my textiles and the corresponding amount for the pledges that they give to you. urgent, set out and come since you have heard a letter with falsehoods.
from aššur-gimlī to azu, ištahšu and niwala: aluwa brings you 10 shekels of tin. amur-aššur brought you a children's dress. i sent you word once or twice, (but) (as for?) you, no greeting whatever came from you. however, send me word if you do not bring the boots up here. send me word with the very first transport, as soon as you have heard the letter. also, send me shoes ... for my aunt.
uzub-iškum son of šu-anum has received 5 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by iddin-kūbī, by ali-abum son of šu-aššur, by enna-suen.
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: i have written to you both once and twice saying: adida should give you 0.83333 mina 1 shekel of silver." as to 0.5 mina from manuba, 0.3333 mina 1 shekel from ali-ahum of panaka's firm, no message ever came from you as to whether or not they gave it to you. my dear brother, make them pay the silver and send me word. aššur-idī son of amur-aššur owes me 3.3333 shekels of silver; demand it from him, and buy a for the maid. azu should bring her -textile for my dress. azu should bring half (a jar?) of olives."
from the 1 mina of silver which i had bēlānum bring to the city for making purchases, 0.6666 mina silver thereof will go to my belonging to aššur. before aššur-dūrī, son of puzur-ištar.
ištar-lamassī made her will as follows: of the 57 skekels of [silver} that are available, iliya will take 37 shekels. ilabrat-bāni will take 20 shekels. 2 1 / 4 shekels of gold and 7.5 shekels of silver plus the seal one will send to my daughter who is a -priestess. 0.5 mina of silver, for which the house is held (as security), 15 shekels of silver ... ... ... . her house is held (as security), the relevant tablets belong to [iliya?]. the merchandise? of their father belongs to the two of them. with [... ... ... ...] she is satisfied, ... ... ... ... she will take. a -bowl weighing 1 mina [iliya] will take. the mirror and the ilabrat-bāni will take. in the presence of maṣi-ilī, of puzur-ištar, of ennam-aššur.
ikūn-pīya seized us against iddin-aššur and ikūn-pīya said to iddin-aššur: concerning the 40 talents of good copper that the investors seized in your possession, neither i nor my brother nor my paternal house will raise further claim against you. the durhumit colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by babazua, ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, by šu-ištar.
(for) 3 jars of wheat i paid 3 3 / 4 shekels; (for) 1 sack of barley 3 shekels; 1.5 shekel for a sheep; 0.5 shekel i paid for reed used a fuel; 0.5 shekel i paid for a few loads of firewood; 1 / 6 shekel i paid for two jars of barley; 1 1 / 4 shekel i paid for 1 jar of wheat; 0.3333 shekel i paid for a few loads of firewood.
0.5 mina 3 shekels of silver, the price of slave-girls, is owed by ...an.
of the five shares belonging to itūr-ilī and ennānum: 13 talents of wool each, (giving) 65 talents of wool; and 56 fleeces each share - in all: 280 fleeces. i received all this. thereof: 1 talent of wool for itūr-ilī;
seal of assur-taklaku, son of ikunum, seal of kinam-assur, son of babalum, seal of assur-nada, son of happuala, of the debt of assur-nada, son of happuala. 10 shekels of 'dust silver' assur-nada owes to the creditor. month vi, eponymy of the successor of abu-salim, son of ili-alum. he will pay within 6 months, if he does not pay he will add 1.5 shekel of silver per month as interest per mina. the bearer of this tab let is the creditor. over there turi-istar, son of zuma-x, (is) the litigant, ask him.
to puzur-anna, ali-ahum and mannum-kī-aššur; specifically to ali-ahum from zukuwa: you have written, saying: send me the silver in your possession." 1 mina less 1 / 4 shekel of silver, of which i gave 0.5 shekel silver to ilī-ašrannī's expenses, ali-ahum son of aššur-bāni brings to you under my seal. 1 container in which there was 1.6666 mina, cups of silver plus 5.5 shekels, the golden gods, all this i entrusted to you for safe-keeping under my seal. i hear that you are going to the city. the very day you depart you must leave the container under my seal with mannum-kī-aššur - if he is delayed; if mannum-kī-aššur is not delayed, then entrust the container under my seal where you observe there lives an affiliated trader who is reliable and not to be nervous about. my dear brothers, the same day send me word about where you have left the container under my seal and inform me. to ali-ahum: i have shown the textile you sent me once or twice. since they offer a low price, ilī-ašrannī your servant brings you the textile, still under your seal."
to itūr-ilī from hanaya and abum-ilum: hanaya brought 20 minas of silver under your seal. we checked it and 5 shekels were missing. 129 textiles cost 6.3333 minas 7 shekels of silver; 2.5 talents 5 minas of tin cost 9.83333 minas of silver at the rate 15 3 / 4 to 1; (this consisted of) 2 talents 10 minas of sealed tin, 25 minas of tin for expenses; 4 black donkeys cost 1.3333 mina of silver; 10 shekels: the harness for the donkeys plus their fodder; amur-ištar received 1 mina 4 shekels of silver, the working capitals of 2 harnessors; 10 shekels: export duty; 10 shekels: additions; 1.5 shekel: of the ; x shekels: 2 -textiles. your silver has been spent for you. all this amur-ištar leads to you. your merchandise is safe, and šalim-ahum came with the leaders with whom i dispatched your goods.
0.6666 mina 6 shekels owed by šu-nūnu son of pazuzu;
15 shekels of silver from the week-eponymy of ..., in month v, i borrowed at the house of a merchant at an interest of 1 shekel per (month) and i gave it to him. 0.5 shekel of silver i gave separately as food for the slave, where he held him later the slave escaped from uṣur-pī-aššur's grip and i paid 3 shekels of silver to the house of the anatolian (and) i obtained the release of the slave. the female slave belonging to the girl, whose sale was forbidden by a verdict of the colony, uṣur-ša-aššur has ... ... ... ... , whereupon he got up and went away.
from alaya and šēp-ištar to the merchant: we took the agreed amount of 6.83333 minas of silver. further, interet of 0.6666 mina 1 shekel of silver; for 4 weeks 12 shekels: deductions; on 6 minas of silver: 5 1 / 4 shekels. specified with the colony's weight stone. in all, 0.83333 mina 8 1 / 4 shekels of silver he transferred to the agreed amount. truly, pilah-ištar son of aššur-rēʾī held 0.3333 mina 4.5 shekels back on the silver in your possession. from alaya: i have paid 0.3333 mina of silver on your debt to ennam-aššur son of šu-illil. šēp-ištar took 5 shekels of silver. let him make it up to you there. aššur-ennam son of šamaš-bāni brings you 7 minas of silver under our seals. my dear brother, when you have received the silver give the tablet concerning the debt of pilah-ištar to aššur-ennam, send the tablet to me so i can nullify the tablet with them both; also, the silver passed overland in the name of pilah-ištar.
to ali-ahum from ...: if you observe ... we shall pack and we shall not stay ... 3 wagons ... straw ... you said: he will not pay the silver." ... make him pay the silver ... 5 days ... he will come to you from zalpa ..."
[obverse too broken for translation]
...9.3333 minas of refined silver ... of iddin-abum the eponym(s) received from šalim-ahum. reckoned from the week of akuza iddin-abum must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per mina per month.
seal of nimar-ištar, son of bala,
ennam-aššur questioned ali-ahum. ennam-aššur said to ali-ahum: we are inheritors. why do our father's customers detain us? come, let us plead with our father's customers and please our father's customers. do not cheat me lest they detain us. five or ten times we have had a colleague and friend sit down to negotiate, but you have rejected everything; so, you cheat me. since you do not hear what brother and friend say, then come, let us go to the four investors who represent our father, let them set us straight and let us please our father's customers, and after that let us go to the city to our sister, the priestess, and clear the matter in accordance with our father's will that is in the city. do not obstruct me and do not let me waste a single shekel of silver." this is not a formal court case, it is a statement before witnesses."
from hanunu, lipit-ištar (and) usur-ša-ištar to ali-ahum: of the 11 minas 7.5 shekels of your silver that they brought from purušhaddum--in accordance with your instructions for your tablet concerning 7.3333 minas 5 shekels of silver which you owed to zukuwa--your terms were exceeded by 3 months and enah-ilī cleared iddin-kūbum, so he took interest for two-and-a-half months: 17.5 shekels of silver; he took 2 shekels per mina as deducted amounts. we produced the tablet with your seal and opened it and put it among your tablets in enah-ilī's house. the rest of your silver, 3 minas 10 shekels, we brought out of enah-ilī's house according to your instructions, and of the 5 talents of copper that you sent, irnuid took 13 minas copper to cover transport expenses (and) fodder for the donkeys. the proceeds from your 4 talents 47 minas of copper, at the rate 0.6666 shekel 15 grains silver (per mina) was 3.5 mina 5 shekels; 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver: the price of 2 your donkeys. of that we paid 17 shekels of silver, the price of a donkey that you owed to ennānum son of abiya. we gave 5 shekels of silver to your maid; we gave 4 shekels of silver to usur-ša-ištar; 1.5 shekel: pasture for the donkeys; 3 shekels: deductions from the silver we brought out of enah-ilī's house we deducted from the price of the tin; 16.6666 shekels: the price of two kutānus. both the silver we brought out of enah-ilī's house and hte silver that was the price of your copper, after we made payments for expenses with the silver became available, and we paid 6.3333 minas 8.5 shekels of silver as the price of the tin, so at the rate 1:8.5 we bought 55 minas 4.5 shekels of tin for you. 16.6666 shekels of your silver remain, so we bought 2 kutanus for your silver for you. 55 minas 4.5 shekels of tin, 2 kutanus and salliya's tablet -- all this usur-ša-ištar brings you under our seal. the silver that left purušhaddum as well as the proceeds from your copper--your goods have been spent, your donkeys too.
... for 5 minas ... a tablet ... ilī-dan and šu-illil ... wool worth 2.3333 minas 4.5 shekels of silver, 1 mina 10 shekels of tin, 6 black donkeys and their harness - all this i gave to amur-šarrassa and he brought it to kuburnat. witnessed by adida, by ababa, by damqaya. 3 shekels of silver is in the possession of šuli.
to ennam-aššur from tutaya: as to the belt you gave me for ummaza, when i and he met at the conclusion of the journey, i did not give him the belt. send me a word and dispose of it wherever possible. my dear brother, give a pot of wheat to dispose over.
from ennam-aššur to anna-anna: itūr-ilī's lead has been lost here, and i gave 1 shekel 15 grains of silver to šalim-bēlī, his servant. let šalim-bēlī give you the silver there. urgent, do not act rashly there with regard to either the outstanding claims or my house. i have accepted the proposal of ilī-dan, iddin-aššur and šu-ištar. i shall come on my trip. ask about enna-suen, and inform (plural) me if he has left the city.
to ali-ahum son of [šalim-aššur], seal of puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan.
concerning the 2.5 minas of refined silver and its interest that adada owes to you, we settled accounts and he must give x mina refined silver and 1 in accordance with the text of his tablet to ali-ahum. further, i shall formally state to him the 1 mina 7 shekels from my two memoranda, and he must pay. witnessed by itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar, by atata the blind one, by alulaya son of isalia. i received 1 mina 10 shekels of silver from alulaya and ...-šamaš. i deposited at the office of the colony as a half-share of our father 6 textiles, including enah-ilī's textile. write our father's name in the office of the colony for what you account for them, and then iddin-ištar and ennānum may deposit my father's (other) half-share. my dear fathers and lords, also, the remainder of the silver, whatever is left in the office of the colony - take care to make them pay that! 4 minas of silver, further, 1 tablet concerning 1 mina of silver in the house of ...
iddin-suen son of ibaya who had hired an attorney against šalim-aššur son of issu-arik, and had received a tablet from the city assembly about his extradition - (those two) settled (their differences) and swore an oath by the city in kanesh. iddin-suen swore on behalf of his sister, his brother and his father's sister. šalim-aššur must not raise claim against them for ibaya's debt. the two must not raise claim against each other. for this matter they swore the oath by the city. month hubur, eponymy ali-ahum. witnessed by ennānum son of ali-abum, by aššur-nādā son of irnuid, by katātum son of malaba, by nūr-suen son of nirah-muttabbil, and sealed by iddin-suen son of ibaya, the barber.
from ... to hanu and a...; to hanu: i sold you 5 for 0.6666 mina less 2 shekels of silver. of that your father gave me 0.3333 mina less 2 shekels of silver; he gave 0.3333 mina to the office of the colony. raise it with your father there. i furthermore gave you a year ago 1 fine robe. its price was 0.3333 mina 5 shekels of silver.
to amurrum-bāni, aššur-imittī, kuziziya and ennam-aššur from šalim-aššur: 2 -textiles of good quality, 2 thin textiles of good quality for clothing for our father with the clothes ... with ennam-aššur kuziziya in ... as i have been made. my dear brothers, take care.
sealed by tūram-ilī; to ennam-aššur and šu-kūbum son of ennam-anum.
say to kuliya, thus says ababaya: exactly as your previous letter stated i have given 3 minas of silver to ennanatum. please, what is this, that you released silver to ennanat-assur? you put trust in his outward appearance, but he as neither house nor child and still you released the silver! please, to an independent trader [...]. [...] as for my misery / expenses, ask bur-istar (about it). all i gave him for assur-sululi has been registered on a wax tablet. please do not act highhandedly. as for the tablet of / in the house of belum-bani - when your letter comes we will obtain its release. your sister talks a lot to your father and she tries to make him forget you! do not act highhandedly, you have nothing to fear since your father has nobody but you. please, the rings of meteoric iron [...] and the [...], let assur-sululi [take them along] to bring (them) to me.
x shekels of silver owed by ewarimuša; 10 shekels of silver owed by ṣilli-ištar; 10 shekels of silver owed by aluwa;
abuwa, the attorney, and the customers of uṣur-ša-aššur son of aššur-malik seized us and led us into uṣur-ša-aššur's house, and his customers opened uṣur-ša-aššur's strong room with us as witnesses, took out his certified tablets, and (selected) from his tablets one certified tablet stating that šalim-aššur shall give 6 talents of tin sealed in the city and 45 -textiles to aššur-idī son of sadaya, and that aššur-idī shall pay 1 talent of refined silver to šalim-aššur; if aššur-idī son of sadaya should be absent, šalim-aššur shall give the tin and the textiles to aššur-idī's representatives. this certified tablet concerning aššur-idī's debt appeared in the house of uṣur-ša-aššur son of aššur-malik among his tablets, and thereafter they entrusted it to aššur-malik son of ali-ahum. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by atata son of šu-kūbum, by šu-aššur son of iddin-aššur; aššur-rabi was on that very day our thir (witness partner).
lulu, ennam-bēlum, pūsu-kēn, sasiya, ennam-aššur son of anninum, ali-ahum son of sukkalliya, iddin-kūbum son of aššur-malik, uṣur-ša-aššur son of aguwa, il-ašrannī, illil-bāni son of zaza, abasiya son of libbaya, akuku, tūr-aššur, ilī-nādā son of aššur-nādā, suen-nādā - all these men sat in the assembly in the burušhaddum colony, and they said: do not sell a single textile to ušinalam!" "
21 talents 51.5 minas: the consignment-value of innaya and the merchant. the fees from the city to kanesh amounted to 5 minas less 4 shekels per talent.
šuli, son of puzur-abeh, will bring proof that ali-ahum, his brother, owes 1 -textile to elamma. if he does not bring proof šuli will pay 0.5 mina of silver to elamma. starting from the week eponymy of assur-mālik, the black one, he will add interest per mina according to the regulation of the colony. eponymy of the successor of baziya, son of šēp-ālum, month iii. witnesses: ir'am-aššur, nar'am-ea, ennam-adad, rimānum
31 -textiles of iddin-suen, 30 -textiles of ah-šalim, 46 -textiles of hinnāya and uṣurānum, 21 -textiles of aššur-rē'ī, 36 -textiles of šu-ištar, 28 -textiles of ennam-suen, 24 -textiles of lā-qēp, 18 -textiles of the merchant, 7 -textiles without seals, 14 textiles import-tax, 17 textiles as pre-emption.
5 talents of copper is owed by kurziya and šu-nisaba. reckoned from the week of abī-ilī they are to pay within 4 weeks. if they have not paid (in time) they are to add interest according to the rule of the colony. month allanātum, eponymy ali-ṭāb. 3 talents 23 minas of copper is owed by iliš-tikal; 5 talents of copper is owed by kura. his terms are overdue by 1 month. 4 talents of copper is owed by aššur-imittī. reckoned from the week of kuluklu he is to pay within 3 weeks. if he has not paid (in time) he is to add interest according to the rule of the colony. month ša-sarrātim, eponymy he who took over from ali-ṭāb. with respect to all these men i have left their certified tablets with atata son of šar-suen. witnessed by aššur-imittī, by ali-ṭāb, by ah-šalim son of iddin-ištar.
2 -textiles due from šu-kūbum; 1 cloak for the lord of the town i offered to buzuliya; 20 minas of copper due from ibni-šamaš the ... ... of amur-šamaš; 8.5 shekels of silver due from suettata.
seal of dadaya son of šu-kūbum, seal of ilī-tappā'ī son of aššur-ṭāb, seal of aššur-rē'ī son of aššuriš-tikal. aššur-rē'ī son of aššuriš-tikal owes 1 mina of silver to ali-ahum. month ša-sarrātim, eponymy after that of aššur-imittī the skipper. he will pay 0.3333 mina per year. if he has not paid 0.3333 mina of silver when his term is up, he will add interest at the rate 0.5 shekel per 0.3333 mina per month. seal of kukuwa son of mannum-kī-iliya, seal of dadaya son of buzi, seal of ilī-dan son of iddin-aššur. ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur shall give 21 talents of wool from kanesh, from the palace, to ilī-dan in kuburnat, ennam-aššur's servant šalim-wardī shall check the 21 talents of wool in kuburnat, and on ennam-aššur's donkeys they will have brought the wool to tukubtu. from the capital on the wool that they are going to pay him, ilī-dan son of iddin-aššur shall give 6.6666 minas of good -silver to ennam-aššur. if ilī-dan has not paid ennam-aššur's representatives from the capital on the wool, he shall add interest at the rate 1.5 shekels per month per mina. seal of šu-anum son of akuza, seal of ennam-aššur son of puzur-ištar, seal of šamaš-bāni his brother, seal of aššur-imittī, seal of ali-ahum son of ennam-dagān. šamaš-bāni son of puzu-ištar owes 2 minas 15 shekels of good silver to iddin-aššur. month kuzallu, eponymy ali-ahum. he will pay 1 mina 7.5 shekels of silver in 8 months and 1 mina 7.5 shekels in 4 months. if he has not paid he will pay interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. 4.6666 minas 5 shekels of silver is the debt of iṭīb-šināti and his partners. i left the certified tablets in kuburnat.
... and let him ... small goods from hattum to the narrow track when we arrive. take olive-oil ... take your memoranda for me and ...
100 breads amur-ištar, 100 breads aššur-imittī, 100 breads tupizi, 100 breads šu-kūbum, 50 breads ali-ahum, 50 breads ennam-bēlī, 100 breads aššur-imittī, [son of ataya, 100 breads puzur-aššur, 50 breads šalim-aššur, 50 breads imdī-ilum, 50 breads the son of hali-abum, 50 breads buzuzum, 50 breads la-qēp, 100 breads kurub-ištar, 100 breads aššur-mālik, 50 breads aššur-ṣulūlī, 50 breads anīnum, 50 breads aššur-rē'ī, 100 breads aššur-nādā, 50 breads ennam-aššur, son of my brother
from kuzizya to kukuwa and ennam-aššur: concerning 1 ½ mina of silver that mannum-kī-ilī brought - the silver was of inferior quality. we melted it down and 5 shekels were lost, and the tablet about 2 ⅔ minas of silver and a tablet about ⅓ mina 2 ½ shekels of silver belonging to mannum-kī-ilī - mannum-kī-aššur was absent so his representatives took as interest ⅓ mina 2 ½ shekels of silver; in all 3 ⅓ minas 5 shekels of silver was paid. thereof anna-anna, ennam-aššur's maid, paid 2 minas less 5 shekels of silver. of that, we wrote a debt-note for ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-ilī for ⅚ mina of refined silver in accordance with your instructions - from the week of innaya son of amuraya, month allanātum. i gave the tablet to anna-anna. we brought our 20 talents of wool from mannum-kī-aššur's house, and following your instructions they bring it to you there. we brought out a tablet and some -stone from mannum-kī-aššur's house and gave it to ištar-lamassī. to ennam-aššur: i have left on a journey to wahšušana. know, my dear brother and son, as to the message you sent me, saying: i shall write to wahšušana that they shall release the copper to you." send word even today, so they release the copper to me and i can convert it to silver, and place it before you so you yourself may decide what is to be done. ... is lost ... copper ... here the tablet ... i hold a tablet stating that they must pay the copper to me. take care to send word to me. also, conduct ennam-aššur to me. he gave the to the anatolian, and if he denies ..."
to luzina and lipit-anum from aššur-rabi; to luzina: i placed 0.6666 mina 6 1 / 4 shekels of silver in your possession in the eponymy šu-suen. witnessed by aššur-rabi son of asuwa, šu-suen, your brother, and šalim-ahum we settled accounts in your house. give the silver to lipit-anum and let him acquire a profitable purchase for me. seize hanunu and have him pay 1 mina 1 shekel of silver. his terms are complete.
for 0.5 mina of silver, a loan by teh alahhinnum of tuhpiya, ili-bani became indebted and he promised the alahhinnum 5 minas of tin (to be paid) when he would come up from the city. in tuhpiya they seized me and i paid 5 minas of tin to zumu, the kassum of the staff of the alahhinnum, in the presence of assur-tab, son of abu-salim, of assur-rabi, the son of innaya, of laban-nada, son of sasallum, of kurkurum, son of aku'a, of assur-malik son of assur-lamassi, of samas-sululi, son of bur-istar, and of karzilili. kannutum, the wife of ili-bani, seized me saying: "half a mina of gold and 1.5 mina of silver, which anah-ili, son of tab-silli-assur, brought to the city, that silver and gold belong to me!" a tablet by witnesses, drawn up in the gate of the god, to the effect that the silver and gold belong to her she showed me and 2 minas of silver, in the presence of anuppiya, son of usur-sa-assur, of urad-assur, son of watrum, of assur-nisu, son of izkanum, of her husband, of her brother iliya, and of mannum-ki-assur, son of ili-wedaku, i have her in tuhpiya. she is satisfied, she will not come back on it. should she not give me the tablets in kanesh, then i have a claim on her for teh (figurines of the) gods. in the name of ennam-assur, son of dadanum, assur-emuqi, the harnessor of asanum, guaranteed me 13 shekels of silver in the presence of kusatiya, of samas-sululi, son of bur-istar, of su-nunu, son of adadaya. 12 shekels of silver, which malahum owes to belum-bani, son of su-rama, - (when) i seized malahum for that silver he said: "i will send it to you from ulama" - in the presence of samas-sululi, son of bur-istar, (and) of assur-malik, son of assur-lamassi. 1 black donkey the harnessor of hanna-narum, son of elali, who has taken up the function of scribe in mamma, let to ulama to hanna-narum, assur-emuqi, and malahum in order to sell it. in the presence of iliya, son of ennam-suen. 6 shekels of silver, the excise on it added, i gave to ennum-ili of gabattum to bring up (from assur), without charging (me) expenses, one fine kutanu-textile. 7 shekels of silver, teh excise on it added, i gave to assur-tab to bring up from the city a fine kutanu-textile without (charging me) expenses. to each of them i gave one mina of copper, in the presence of ennam-assur, son of dalas (and) of assur-samsi, son of pilah-assur. 1.5 mina of silver, 85 minas of refined copper, and separately 3 shekels of silver for my maid; 3 shekels of silver and 75 grains of silver of his god, belonging to assur-imitti, 53.5 grains of pasallu-gold and one black donkey - all this i gave to alpili. 10 shekels of silver and separately 3 shekels of silver of assur-bani, plus a black donkey (and) a jar of acorns - all this i gave to asanum and i gave 0.5 shekel of silver to assur-bani and he has shipped it to the city. 2 minas 7 shekels of silver are with assur-imitti, son of mannum-balum-assur, under the seals of my representative, ... alpili.
from šalim-aššur to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: as for every shekel of silver of our funds as much as is there, as well as every shekel of silver in your possession and in ali-ahum's - it is not a good idea for us to send it to the city. either a single shekel will accrue, or we should give every shekel of silver as interest-bearing loans, so a profit of some shekels of silver will accrue. here purchases are possible and of 1.3333 mina 5 shekels of silver ... collect every shekel of silver so here ... at least 10 minas of silver ... to ennam-aššur: tin as well as textiles, what accrues to you is available for purchases. 2 minas ... you await malik-ilišu. every textile that is available give that to ali-ahum and aluwa so they may bring it. leave in the spring. may for the very first time the silver, the proceeds from the lapis lazuli or from the textiles. ... send me word ...
i left 62 kutānus with ir'ibum and šēp-ištar. we gave thereof 30 kutānus to šuppunuman; 5 textiles for the guide from išhianit. pack 11 kutānus in the sacks and leave them in dādiya's name until my instructions arrive. the rest of my kutānus - 16 textiles remain. after i left, with respect to the remainder, send me as much as you will sell.
40 minas of copper due by ikūn-pī-aššur, son of šu-ištar, per 1 mina he will add as interest 12 shekels per month; month ii / iii, eponymy of šu-hubur. 37.3333 minas of copper due from ilī-bāni, son of ibni-ilī. 1 mina 15 shekels of silver due from šalim-aššur, son of uphāqum, he shall pay wherever we meet, either in anatolia or in the city. 0.5 mina of silver due from aššur-rē'ī, he will add an interest of 10 shekels (per month); beginning of month vi, eponymy of šu-hubur. 18 shekels of silver due from izziz-mīšar, month iv, he will pay within 6 months; year eponymy of šu-hubur. 9 minas 10 shekels of copper due from ennam-ilī, son of dukšum. 9 minas of copper due from ibni-adad, the . 20 minas of copper due from šu-bēlum, son of dāya. 0.6666 mina of silver, the working capital of aššur-rē'ī, son of iddin-ištar.
19 shekels of 'dust silver', the price of 1 mina and 48 shekels of tin, which kannutum has as claim on amur-istar, son of idaya - within one month he will pay. month viii. in the presence of salim-adad, the musician, of iddin-suen, the son of atanah.
sealed by šu-bēlum son of iddin-abum; to ikūnum son of šamaš-bāni, eništarum and aluwa.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: concerning ennānum's additions, the 10 shekels of silver from the caravan that became available to me with uṣurānum as witness, pay him 10 shekels of silver out of my silver that i left with you and then set witnesses for him. he seized me here and said: give me the silver!" i answered: "...you will receive the silver.""
seal of puzur-suen, seal of šu-bēlum, seal of [...]. 50 minas of copper puzur-suen owes to elamma. at the time of the threshing he will weigh out pure copper of tappašatta. if he does not pay when his term is up, he will add interest in accordance with the rule of the durhumit colony. separately he will pay 10 shekels of silver in kanesh, when the barley is ripe. if he does not pay i will collect it in durhumit for his account.
... issu-arik's instructions arrived to me, and ... let me inform you of your father's tablet and either in the city, whether silver from free loans or from the debt of your father, i had washed silver paid. he said: why do you inform me alone? my brothers are not present. if you have had the silver paid then we shall balance your own silver." witnessed by amur-šamaš, witnessed by nab-suen son of illil-bāni, witnessed by ikuppi-aššur son of šu-ištar. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave a tablet in front of aššur's dagger in the gate of the god."
from aššur-ṭāb to anna-anna: as to the 16 shekels of silver that you sent me, he made purchases after his own will without asking me. i personally bring you a .
10 shekels of silver belonging to ali-ahum is owed by annina.
we entrusted 21.3333 minas of silver under our seals to hinnaya.
seal of aššur-malik son of ilī-bāni, seal of ali-ahum son of inah-ilī, seal of amur-ištar son of miššu-rabi, seal of aguwa, seal of iddin-abum. concerning 24 minas of refined silver that iddin-abum owes to aššur-bēl-awātim. reckoned from the week if libbaya and iliš-tikal he must pay within 20 weeks. if he has not paid (in time), he must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per mina per month. if they write his tablet, he must book 6 minas of gold in the name of aššur-bēl-awātim.
iddin-aššur has given 4 minas of refined silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, from the caravan of šu-illil, to iddin-abum as an investment loan. witnessed by aššur-bāni, by lā-qēp.
of 24 shekels of [silver], the price of the slave-girl, which i had given to atanah, he gave 4 shekels of silver to ah[u-waqar](?); 11.83333 shekels of [silver] he [gave] to bēlum-bāni. 7 shekels of silver, the debt of..., 1.1666 shekels of silver and 0.5(?)... as interest ... [... ] atanah we gave. 0.5 shekel of silver is owed by ahuša, son of kura. 0.5 shekel is owed by zagalʾu, his slave, 0.83333 shekel my road-tax. 5 minas of silver - the deficiency on the silver (is) 0.5 shekel of silver, due to the underweight of the (1-)mina-weight (used) for tin for a value of 5 minas of silver - i gave (this) 0.5 shekel of silver to aššur-ṭāb. all this is owed by ata(ya), son of ikūnum. travel expenses, road-tax cost of transport and deficiency on the 10-mina-weight (used) for (weighing) 42.5 minas of tin is also owed by ataya, son of ikūnum, to bēlum-bāni. 15 shekels of refined silver, 3 minas of native copper, two ... saddlecloths as - all this is owed by narām-suen, son of kakkiya, and iddin-nirah to bēlum-bāni. witnessed by ali-ahum, son of enah-ilī. 7 shekels of refined silver due by šu-kūbum, son of šu-bēlum, to bēlum-bāni, witnessed by ali-ahum, son of enah-ilī, (and) by asānum, son of abirušakum. 30.83333 minas of carnelian, our joint property, cost 5 minas 5 shekels of silver. 3 minas 5 shekels of silver thereof belong to bēlum-bāni, 1.3333 min[a of silver] to zagalʾu, 0.6666 mina [of silver] to adad-bāni. 6 be[lts], 2 saddlecloths, 1 cup, 2 black donkeys (worth) [0.3333(?)] mina and 6.3333 shekels of silver, and a slave-girl, equivalent of 0.3333 mina of silver, they brought here. all this asānum gave to bēlum-bāni. 11 shekels of refined silver laqēpum, the scribe, son of abaya, owes to bēlum-bāni; (for it) he will let 24 shekels of silver reach me in the city. witnessed by ikūnum, son of aššur-bāni, (and) by the son of šu-ilabrat.
6 minas of refined silver is owed by kulaba, šupun-ahšu and hanunu. 6 minas of refined silver is owed by bēlum-bāni son of kasiya.1.3333 mina of refined silver is owed by amur-ištar son of šalim-aššur. 5 minas of litu-silver is owed by šēp-ištar son of ali-ahum. 1 mina of refined silver is owed by šu-ištar son of šukkutum. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is owed by ennam-adad son of aššur-malik. 6.6666 minas 8 shekels of refined silver is owed by enna-suen son of iddin-abum. 2 minas 10 shekels of refined silver is owed by irišum son of amur-šamaš.2.5 minas of refined silver is owed by ikūn-pīya son of aššur-bāni. 0.6666 mina of litu-silver is owed by ilališkan and šuppun-ahšu. 2 minas 5 shekels of refined silver is owed by aluwa. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is the working capital of lulu son of aššuriš-tikal. 1 mina of refined silver is the working capital of šu-ištar son of šukkutum. 1 mina of refined silver is owed by šumma-libbi-aššur. 5.5 shekels of refined silver is owed by nannaya. 10 shekels of litu-silver is owed by aššur-rabi son of lā-qēp. 0.6666 mina of refined litu-silver is owed by šu-ištar. 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of litu-silver is owed by ašed and his son adiya. 1.5 mina of refined silver is owed by ilī-muttabbil son of amur-ištar. 20 minas of washed copper is owed by tutaya son of anah-ilī. 1.83333 mina 4 shekels of refined silver is owed by aššur-taklāku son of ikūnum.0.5 mina 1.83333 shekels of litu(-silver) is owed by waldi-ilum son of šu-bēlum. 0.83333 minas of refined silver is owed by amur-aššur son of abiya. 0.5 mina of refined silver is the working capital of ibni-adad.10 shekels of refined silver is owed by ikūn-pī-aššur son of puzur-ištar. 12.5 minas 6 shekels of refined silver is owed by amur-šamaš son of šu-anum.0.5 mina 1.5 shekel of refined silver is owed by abu-šalim. 1 mina 7.5 shekels of silver is owed by atata son of ennānum. 3.83333 minas 5.5 shekels of refined silver is owed by amur-šamaš son of šu-anum. 1.5 mina of refined silver is owed by amur-šamaš son of šu-anum. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is the working capital of kize. 1 mina of refined silver is owed by abu-šalim. 2 minas 16 shekels of lapis lazuli of good quality from the votive offerings for aššur, 45 ordinary kutānus, 30 minas of tin plus 2 black donkeys and their harness has the merchant given to šu-ištar son of šukkutum. 0.5 mina of refined silver is owed šuppun-uman. 10 shekels of refined silver is owed by šu-bēlum son of kuziziya. 2 minas 4 shekels of refined silver is owed by šu-ištar son of aššur-lamassī. 12 shekels of refined silver is owed by ennam-aššur son of erra-idī. 0.5 mina 2.5 shekels of silver is owed by amur-ištar.
1 mina 14.5 shekels of silver, the votive offerings for amurrum, adad, šarru-mātān, suen, šēdu who chases away, bēlum, ea and mīšarum, lamassum, anna and pabil-sag;
to ali-ahum from amur-šarrassu and from šu-illil: in accordance with what aššur-šamšī and dadaya wrote to you i and šu-illil here ... and they have written to you. in accordance with what the men wrote to you, if there is a case, then send me word so we may have the man pay the silver. pay attention and send me word with the first transport. do not focus on taking all of the silver. kura will not pay ...
... and ali-ahum. reckoned from the week of itūr-ilī, month mahhur-ilī, in the eponymy enna-suen, they paid me. witnessed by ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar, by aššur-dugul son of pilah-ištar, by annina son of puzur-anna.
[x minas and] 2 shekels of refined silver ilī-ālum owes to šu-ištar. witnessed by ilī-dān, son of id(di)n-aššur, by ikūn-pī-aššur, son of puzur-ištar, and by šu-kū[bum]. on ... ... ... ... ... ... he will send it me from kuburnat or i will take it from his outstanding claims. the rest of the silver i will (then) borrow at interest and the silver and the interest on it ilī-ālum will compensate.
from šu-ištar to zizizi and ištar-lamassī: anupiya brings you 10 shekels of tin. my dear mother, without you i have no one. do not let the children starve. ... to ... and anupiya ... ... he should give you ... a jar of wheat. certainly, in this way i instructed him here and as for you, in the matter of the anatolian, send me word about the 3 shekels of silver that i left, whether i myself paid the silver or whether abušalim paid it.
1 mina 2 shekels of refined silver anisaba owes to tūram-ilī. reckoned from the week eponymy of ilī-nādā he will send me the silver to kanesh in 2 months. if he does not send it he will add as interest 1.5 shekel per mina per month. in the presence of nabi-suen, of šu-kūbum.
to mannum-kī-aššur and anna-anna from ennam-aššur: šalim-wardī brings 1.5 mina silver and 5 shekels of gold under my seal to itūr-ilī. in accordance with ... šalim-wardī itūr-ilī ... send to me ... i await it. also take care with my grain and in accordance with ... both the grain ... inform me. to anna-anna: make the oil sweet; also, seal all that i write you about and send it with šalim-wardī. also, write me about the affair concerning lā-qēp. to mannum-kī-aššur: i shall bring the proceeds from your textiles when i arrive.
i owe as votive offering to aššur 1 talent 1 mina 1 shekel of silver plus 1 mina 1 shekel of gold, to purify his head, plus a sun-disk of 3 minas of gold. i owe vulva-ornaments as votive offerings to ištar of assur, of qatna and of dim.
1 mina of silver ... 4 kutānu-textiles ... ... silver; further, 2 shekels of silver ... of the stones confirm ... he has confirmed the stones. the silver stands ready. in all: 1 mina 2 shekels of silver is owed by ... witnessed by pilah-..., by aššur-nādā. if he has not paid the silver in ... i shall count interest for him reckoned from the week of aššur-bēl-awātim at the rate 3 shekels per mina per month.
58 minas of tin, 24 -textiles, 1 -textile, 2 black donkeys belonging to me; 21 -textiles, 1 donkey of iddin-abum; 1 bag with 5 -textiles of šu-kūbum; 6 minas 15 shekels of copper (and) 7 shekels of tin for his use šamaš-ublam, brought to ali-ahum.
...šia owes ... to ali-ahum. he will pay at this (coming) harvest. witnessed by waldi-ilum.
ir'ibum and i gave 40 kutānu-textiles, 3 saddlecloths, for 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver, their wages, to ašu-uman and his brother kikaršan, the brother of zahula, in order to have it brought into kanesh.we gave 30 kutānu-textiles, 3 saddleclothes to šuppun-uman from maduwa for 0.5 shekel each - their wages being 15 shekels of silver;we gave 5 kutānus and one single package of wool - his wages were 2.5 shekels - to the guide from hattum.when they have brought the textiles safely into my house in kanesh they will receive their wages.
i entrusted 4 minas of refined silver, its transport tariff paid for, to kasiya son of amyriya with amur-aššur son of dada and badatiya son of ikūn-pī-... as witnesses, and he brought it to the city to kabaya son of wa..., šu-nūnu and kapattiya, my brothers.
280 minas of copper, the price of 4 oxen, is owed by tatardu.
to ali-ahum and šalim-aššur from šu-illil; specifically to šalim-aššur: i ... the matters ... x shekels of silver has been given to you as reimbursement. 28.6666 minas of copper i gave to you in kuburnat as a working capital - under my seal. as to the x minas of good copper that you promised to pay now - without asking (permission) you have left. the day you left you met with me and i said: let me know about your leaving." so, if the copper were not here, yet the memorandum had been deposited, you would have made me appear as a non-gentleman, and like a non-gentleman you have not met with me. ... all my iron was sold to agents for 30 minas of good copper ... oil ... i gave you white ... i sent you ... minas of oil ... my dear brother, give x minas of good copper to ali-ahum. i should not become angry with you. ..."
... entrust ... to ali-ahum so he may bring it to the merchant. also, on behalf lay claim to it with 3 affiliated traders as witnesses.
1 talent 25 minas of wool and 0.3333 mina of tin ennam-aššur left with sahar-ilī. apart from one single top-pack with textiles that he left with him.
1 ... textile, a dress, is owed by ikūn-pīya son of aššur-bāni.
6 shekels of silver: puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan; 2.5 shekels: aššur-bāni son of kutaya;
from šalim-aššur to my representatives, idnaya, šu-ištar and ennam-aššur: my dear brothers, for 1 talent of silver ... you have learnt about a verdict of the city ... and 4 minas of silver ... a tablet ... urgent, pay attention to the words of the tablet. urgent, ... if ... will not ... then place it / him before the colony, let the colony give them to an affiliated trader so he may bring it / him.
šu-laban's investors, kukkulānum, the attorney of šu-laban, ṭāb-aššur and his attorney entered inah-ilī's house, and they took note of the tablets, containers, goods and tablets as well as the missives that inah-ilī had sent to šu-laban in purušhaddum concerning his goods, both the tablets and memoranda concerning outsiders, and the investors said: (these are) the half-packs belonging to šu-laban that puzur-aššur brought out from purušhaddum under the seals of the representatives of the investors and šu-laban." the investors identified the sealings of šu-laban and the representatives of the investors, and the investors identified the containers sealed by the representatives of the investors, and they investigated the tablets, and inah-ilī said: "i shall take this silver, the price of the tin." the investors answered: "as to your silver ... the majority of our partners are not here. within 3 days we shall enter and clear it." puzur-aššur said together with his attorney: "7 minas of silver is deposited in a package. it belongs to my sister šāt-adad. šāt-adad is the merchant. give me the package." inah-ilī said together with šu-laban's attorney: "we have not held back any package belonging to a merchant. take the package of the merchant." šu-laban's investors said to puzur-aššur: "clear it wtih us and after that we shall the package to you." ... they brought out and to ... the name of ... the representatives of the investors ... aššur-taklāku and bēlānum sealed. ... aššur-taklāku, bēlānum and kukkulānum ... sealed the containers and they entrusted the half-packs and the tablets in containers to inah-ilī."
sealed by akuza son of šu-anum, by uraya son of manana, by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by lā-qēpum son of illil-bāni, by itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave a tablet with our testimony before assur's dagger.
16 minas of refined silver owed by ikūnum son of ilī-bāni. month ab-šarrāni, eponymy šu-hubur son of elāli. he will pay in 10 years. further, 1.3333 mina of refined silver is owed by him as well; he will pay at the start of my journey. ataya son of šu-ištar owes 12 minas of refined silver to ennam-aššur, and šalim-aššur is guarantor. month ša-kēnātim, eponymy after that of puzur-nirah. he will pay in 46 weeks. further, 1.5 mina of refined silver is owed by ataya as well; he will pay in 20 weeks. also, 0.6666 mina of silver is his working-capital; he is held in service by the silver. 12 minas of refined silver is owed by erišum. he will pay in 16 weeks. further, 2.5 minas of refined silver is owed by erišum as well; he will pay in 12 weeks. 1.5 mina of refined silver is owed by erišum and his brother ilī-bāni; they will pay in 4 weeks. 0.3333 mina of refined silver is owed by ilī-bāni; he will pay on his return from the city. 10.5 minas of refined silver is owed by pilah-ištar. month tē'inātum, eponymy iddin-aššur. he will pay in 46 weeks. 9 minas 11.6666 shekels of refined silver is owed by aššur-emūqī. he will pay in 16 weeks. 4 minas of refined silver is owed by uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb. they will pay in 6 weeks. they are jointly responsible for the silver. 5 minas of silver is owed by dudu son of baziya; month ša-kēnātim, eponymy after iddin-aššur. 4 minas of silver is in the possession of aššur-malik. he will pay in 20 weeks. 2 talents 30 minas of good copper is owed by ilī-emūqī son of amur-šamaš. he will pay in 20 weeks. 2 minas of refined silver is owed by lāqēp son of izzizam-ilī. he will pay in 3 weeks. 2 minas 10 shekels of refined silver is owed by sagum and his son šumi-abiya; they are jointly responsible for the silver. 1.3333 mina 4 shekels of refined silver is owed by aššur-nādā and sahar-ilī; they are jointly responsible for the silver. they will pay in 6 weeks. 2 talents 2 minas of -copper is owed by zikiki. month mahhur-ilī, eponymy amur-aššur. he will pay in 2 months. also, 0.6666 mina of refined silver is the working-capital of zikiki as well; he is held in service by the silver. if he runs away somewhere, he will pay interest. month allanātum, eponymy šu-hubur. 1.6666 minas of silver is owed by adad-rabi. month te'inātum, eponymy šudaya. it runs for 8 weeks. sealed by aššur-dan son of uku, by his brother ṣilūlu, by buzi son of šu-anum. they will give the copper in the city to aššur-dan son of uku, šalim-aššur's representative, for buying barley, and he will measure out good barley in the city according to the rate of the -officials. 6 minas of silver owed by hubazi and išar-ki-matān, his brother. 2 minas 10 shekels of refined silver is owed by kuziya son of buzizi. month mahhur-ilī, eponymy after adad-bāni son of puzur-ea. 5 minas of refined silver is owed by galgaliya and alu son of adudu. 3 minas of refined silver is owed by šu-laban son of bazi, aššur-ṭāb son of ennānum and hanunu. they will pay in 10 weeks. 15 shekels of refined silver is owed by šu-suen son of zukuwa. he will pay the silver in 3 weeks; if he has not paid, he will add interest. also 0.3333 mina 2 shekels of refined silver is owed by enna-suen. eponymy aššur-damiq, month kuzallu.
1 mina of silver under my seal for aššur-bēl-awātim, the price of his grain.
thus kanesh, say to <every single> colony and the trading stations until tuhpiya as follows: kuliya, our messanger, has been sent to transmit instructions. give him two escorts and (thus each) colony must convey him to the (next) colony. do not cause him to delay! if among the escorts you have chosen somebody refuses to accompany kuliya, bind him and have him brought here.
to ennam-aššur from amur-ištar: abu-šalim's customers have seized 1.5 mina 6 shekels of silver from his brother aššur-idī here. and i have personally seized silver before 2 witnesses together with the customers. then his customers went up to the colony and said: we shall take the silver here." according to the verdict of the colony the silver will go to kanesh with aššur-idī and they will discuss on the basis of his tablet. also, to me he owes 0.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver. take the silver on your own responsibility. i hold a certified tablet with my witnesses here. ... to šalatuwar ... i must not be delayed a single day. i shall come with the servants."
šalim-aššur and amur-ištar seized us, and amur-ištar said to šalim-aššur: i appear as heir. you three owe 3 minas of silver to my father. my father left me your certified tablet concerning your debt. pay the silver. or, if you have a quittance ... a tablet ... so i can invalidate your tablet." šalim-aššur answered: "yes, we three became indebted for the silver. i sent anninum to aššur-malik and šalim-aššur, my representatives, with the silver, and they paid the silver to your father's representatives. also, after they paid the silver, i met with your father." witnessed by eddinaya, by ṣill-adad. the kanesh colony gave us and we gave our testimony in the gate of the god before aššur's dagger on a tablet. "
from ikūn-pīya to ali-ahum: earlier i gave a slave-girl to buziya son of asaya and he brought her to you. he did not give you the slave-girl, but returned and here i wrote his tablet about the price of the slave-girl, 0.5 mina 5 shekels of silver. my dear brother, there ...
ennam-aššur (said to) aššur-bāni son of iduwa: with respect to the 18 shekels of silver that you owe to me - pay me the silver!" aššur-bāni answered: "i have paid the silver to your representative and i mentioned your name." ennam-aššur said: "in my case you have not paid the silver to my representative and have not mentioned my name, will you then not pay three times the amount of my silver?" aššur-bāni answered: "i shall pay you." witnessed by annina son of aššur-bēl-awātim, by aššur-bāni son of iddin-abum. he touched our ears."
1 packet of 10 minas of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, belonging to me, for my investors; they will buy (with it) tin for me. separately 5 minas of silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, belonging to . they will buy -textiles for me. one bundle (of silver), the price paid for 2 of his, for hatiya; one bundle (containing) 35 shekels (of silver), the price paid for a , for iliya; 1 bundle containing 0.3333 mina for ner'amtum; one bundle containing 0.3333 mina for šīmat-ištar; 13 shekels (of silver) for kurub-ištar. all this i entrusted to aššur-lamassī, in the presence of amur-ištar, (and) of aššur-nādā.
to itūr-ilī from enna-suen: i wrote you and said: my tablets are with ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur. take my tablets and let them be with you." if my tablets are with you, then open for the seal on my tablets, and (you will see that) six shekels of iron sealed by puzur-suen's son is placed with my tablets. my dear father and lord, hire a reliable affiliated trader and have him bring me the iron. also, set witnesses for the amount of iron to the fact that the iron must pass overland in the name of puzur-suen's son. here a reliable affiliated trader who is not to be feared guaranteed for my silver. my dear father and lord, do inform me with respect to ennam-aššur."
representing the sons of šalim-aššur anupiya seized us against galgaliya and haršumnuman, and they heard a tablet concerning 10 minas of silver, their debt. anupiya said: does the tablet not bear your seals?" galgaliya answered: "they are my sealings." anupiya said: "we are inheritors. produce evidence for this, that you have either paid the silver to šalim-aššur or have paid to the sons of šalim-aššur." haršumnuman said: "i personally satisfied šalim-aššur with the silver of our tablet. i am willing to go to the river for you.""
from dan-aššur, šalim-wardī and šu-nūnu to ennam-aššur: in the previous merchandise šu-nūnu brought you 3 talents of good copper; (plus) 1.5 talents of good copper - in all 4.5 talents ... šalim-wardī and šu-nūnu ... we seized salliya here concerning the goods belonging to your brother, and he said: bring me a ... missive then i shall release the goods to you." here we seized salliya concerning your brother and we said: "to kanesh ... within 10 days ..." make up your mind. "
thus ennam-aššur and dadiya, say to elamma: of the 65 minas of your silver that arrived here with ali-ahum's caravan, 10.3333 minas of silver remained. we received 5.3333 minas from what you invested with ali-ahum. thereof: 1.3333? mina 8 shekels lā-qēp took; 1 mina 29 shekels additional payment for your 65 minas of silver; 48 shekels of silver aššur-imittī took; 35 shekels of silver ataya took; 6 shekels the girl took. [for the rest?] of your silver we bought [9]6? textiles [for 8? mi]nas (of silver); [16.6666] minas of loose tin at 12.5 : 1 cost 1 mina 28 shekels of silver; [4] black donkeys cost 75 shekels of silver; 0.5 mina the working capital for aššur-lamassī, son of ennumāya, 2 shekels his clothing allowance; [10] shekels of silver for donkey harness. when at the accounting there was a surplus of 15 shekels of silver we paid 2 shekels of silver for food for the donkeys (and) [for] 11 shekels of silver we bought for you (an additional) 2.5 minas of tin. two textiles from aššur-lamassī's working capital are packed. with all this aššur-lamassī is on his way to you. 2 minas [x] shekels of silver that atāya took he entrusted [?].""
13 shekels of refined silver ilī-bāni, son of aššur-šamšī, owes to lamassutum. reckoned from the week-eponymy of itūr-ilī, month ii, year-eponymy of the successor of aššur-imttī, the boatman, within 5 weeks he will pay. if he does not pay he will add per mina, per month 1.5 shekel as interest. in the presence of aššur-bēl-awātim, son of iddin-dagan, of aššur-emūqī, son of kuziziya.
thus ali-ahum, aššur-rēṣī, ennam-aššur and dadiya, say to elamma: in accordance with your instruction we borrowed for you at interest 30 minas of silver at a merchant's office. we added half a to the surface of the house plot about which you had reached an agreement and we paid 3 minas of silver. realize well that the silver is interest bearing, so send the silver. the purchases have been made, we will send aššur-mūtappil off to you with the next opportunity. the judges have set you a term of two years, don't exceed that term lest they disavow you on the basis of your tablet. take care to send the tablet of the son of azua.""
the plenary assembly of the colony passed a verdict, stating that šalim-aššur and šu-bēlum on this very day must make declarations, and they must discuss in order to come to an agreement; further, they must deposit the tablet from the city assembly and of the men who settled their affair before the judges.
two talents and 40 minas of silver, 5000 measures of barley, 30 jars plus 40 jars outstanding claims; in the city a plot of 10 , a built house, the house of dilaya(?); 60 textiles, rugs, cauldrons, bronze objects and slaves- (are) the estate of our father which we have promised / been ordered to divide. why have you suppressed (it) without me? ali-ahum answered: in order to prevent my and your extra share from being inspected i have suppressed it." elamma answered: "if only i could have taken along my own extra share and had obtained my share in my father's estate, then by this day i would have had at my disposal one talent of gold! that he repressed me ,i wish to retain as (a statement) made with an oath by the city!" in the presence of eddināya ,and of ennum-aššur."
we entrusted 12 minas of refined silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, sealed by the merchant, and further, 10 minas of refined silver, votive offerings for aššur, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, sealed by merchant, to karwaya.
from ilī-bāni to ennam-aššur: you left the price in silver for 41.5 minas of copper. the owner of the silver came here the very day you had left, and he said: it was 45.5 minas of copper." brother and friend answered: "since the man has left, the matter should not be long-drawn-out. make him swear." i made him swear and i personally deposited 4 minas of copper. my dear brother, give the silver for it to man-mahir so he can add it to the silver of my working capital."
2 shekels of silver owed by ilī-wēdāku. he will pay to šalim-wardī in kuburnat.
2.5 talents refined copper due by ganunu; 3 talents of refined copper also by ganunu; 1 talent of refined copper due by aššur-ṭāb, son of amur-nahuš; 1 talent 30 minas of refined copper due by the same aššur- [-ṭab, son of amur-nahuš; [... talents] of refined [copper due by aššur- ...; 3 talents 20 minas of refined copper due by adūdum; 1 talent refined copper due by puzur-[amurrum; 2 talents 40 minas of bad copper due by ennam-suen, son of ikūa; 15 minas of refined copper due by ennam- [-suen, son of ikua; 28 minas of refined copper due by ikūn-pīya, son of ennam-a[ššur]; 3 talents of refined copper due by puzur-wēr; 1.5 mina of refined silver due by uršiši; 1.5 mina of refined silver due by the same uršiši, as whose guarantors elamma and amur-ištar were registered on behalf of ilī-[...]; 0.5 mina of silver, his working capital, due by the same uršiši; [x] talents of refined copper due by ennam-[...] and [...]-ilī; 20+x minas of refined copper [...] 15 minas of silver [...] due by ilī-[...], son of [...]; [...] below (a price of) [x] silver he shall not go?; 10 textiles (and) 10.3333 minas of copper [due by eruzi; 10 minas of refined copper and 6 shekels [of silver due by atahšu. all these certified records records are in ...num's house?.
ikūn-pīya owes 2 minas of refined silver to puzur-anna. he must let the silver reach him in the city. if he has not let the silver reach him in the city, 3 minas of silver will be deducted from my tablet at the rate 0.5 mina per mina. witnessed by ikūn-pīya son of ilī-mīšar, by babala son of aššur-ṭāb, by aššur-ṭāb son of huraṣānum.
to adida and ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: as to the 0.83333 minas less 1 shekel of silver which is in your possession, give (that) to ali-ahum. šu-suen owes me 0.5 mina of silver; make him pay and to ... i left with manuba. i said: šu-suen should pay you 0.5 mina of silver and then release his extra payment(?)." šu-suen paid 0.5 mina of silver and he released his extra payment(?). also, he returned šu-suen's missive to me. have manuba pay you 0.5 mina of silver there."
10 shekels of silver owed by man-mahir;
from ikūn-pīya to puzur-ištar and ennam-aššur: on the day you hear my letter... for 2 or 3 minas copper... ...they have arrived. write to enna-suen that he should come. if any of his creditors holds him back, then let him entrust the silver to a trustworthy affiliated trader and send it to me.
uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb have paid 56 minas of silver from the silver of aššur-idī son of sadaya to šalim-aššur, but 4 minas of silver remain (unpaid) and šalim-aššur has written a debt note for uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb, and he has released the (old) tablet concerning 1 talent of silver from the debt of aššur-idī son of sadaya to aššur-ṭāb and uṣur-ša-aššur. the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony has given me for these proceedings and i gave a tablet before aššur's dagger. witnessed by adada; aššur-imittī son of ataya and puzur-ti'amtum were my (absent) partners.
sealed by lamassī; for ennam-aššur and ali-ahum.
4 shekels of silver for 3 pairs of tallānu from wahšušana plus small goods - all this is owed by itūr-ilī son of puzur-anna.
to ali-ahum from dami-pī-aššur: with respect to the silver that pn owes ... we are well ... they made for the merchant. i must not be alienated from you. my dear brother, my dear brother, the son of kuzuzarum owes me 17.5 shekels of silver, the price of copper. your brother amur-ištar is his guarantor. make him pay the silver and send it to me. as you hear my missive send me small goods worth 0.5 mina 5 shekels of silver to hahhum. concerning the matter of the narrow track, if it is not feasible, send me word in hahhum, then i shall act so as to bring the silver of the merchant safely on.
23.3333 minas hinnāya has deposited as his share. for 3 textiles at 0.3333 mina apiece he deposited 1 mina as his share, 5.5 textiles at 10 shekels apiece, (for) 3 textiles of your temple-fund they submitted 10 shekels apiece. in all: 25 minas 15 shekels of silver, which you have as deposit on your account. 1 mina and 15 shekels you have to balance are of (for) hinnāya's account.
two -textiles belonging to šu-ištar, son of luzini, liptānum gave to iddin-aššur, son of dān-aššur, for 27 minas of refined copper. for these words the wahšušana colony made me available and before the .-symbol of aššur i gave my testimony. in the presence of buzāzu, son of pūšu-kēn. aššur-dūrī, son of puzur-ištar was my fellow witness.
to ali-ahum, bēlum-bāni, annina and aššur-malik from zukuwa: i left you 0.3333 mina 7 shekels of silver, and i said: let ali-ahum add 10.5 shekels of silver and pay 0.5 mina 7.5 shekels of silver to iddin-aššur." you then wrote and said: "we offered the silver to iddin-aššur, but he would not take it." note on a memorandum the day when you offered it to him. indicate the week and the month. pay the 0.3333 mina 7 shekels of silver that i left with you to iddin-aššur. also, what you have paid, let him give the silver to ali-ahum until my instructions arrive. my dear brothers, i sent word to you once or twice, so do pay attention to my instructions. as to the tablets concerning anatolians that i also left with you, have bēlum-bāni assist you and take care to have the men pay the silver. a year has gone by. the silver you make the anatolians pay, give that to bēlum-bāni."
to ali-ahum, lulu and ennam-aššur; specifically to ennam-aššur from puzu-aššur: i gave you 13 minas of tin under my seal in zalpa, and i said: lead it into kanesh." witnesses were aššur-bāni son of kutaya, ennam-suen son of the suen-priest. my dear brother, entrust the tin under my seal to my representatives. to my representatives: my dear brothers, have the tin sold and converted to silver, seal the silver and let it be. do me a favour. i too am a man able to do favours."
to adida and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: i left 24 textiles in 6 sacks in the storeroom under my seal. thereof: 12 good textiles, 8 second quality textiles, 4 textiles belonging to ušmaya. if the store-room is not guarded, then place the textiles where they will be under guard. my dear brothers, sell my textiles so that the silver is ready for me. i should not have any outstanding claims. sell for cash on delivery. as to 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver (and) 21 minas 10 shekels of copper of good quality that i left with you - sell the copper for silver, seal it and let it remain. take 10 shekels of silver (and) 1 litre of oil (in) an -container in the store-room and send it with šalim-bēlī and ṭāb-ṣill-aššur. let the textiles which šalim-bēlī will bring in remain. to adida: in your textiles buy for me 1 thin one and 1 waterproof ʾ.
to ilī-mutabbil from ennam-aššur: here i and lā-qēp son of šu-aššur settled accounts in the house of the official with you and lā-qēp son of puzur-šadu'e as witnesses, and 12.5 minas 7 shekels of refined silver — apart from the silver of our caravan — is owed by lā-qēp. reckoned from the week of itūr-ilī. with respect to the silver it was you i designated. on his arrival in purušhaddum, he should send the silver. when he arrived in purušhaddum in accordance with our agreement you write a tablet for him for the silver for which i had designated you and which he did not pay, and you set a term for him. also, i kept writing to my represesntatives and you to have the silver paid, but until this day he has not paid the silver to my representatives or to you. also, after i personally arrived, he demanded and demanded the silver repeatedly, but he would not pay the silver. he said: "ilī-mutabbil wrote my tablet. send for my tablet, let them bring my tablet and then take your silver." he keeps answering about his tablet and refuses to pay the silver. my dear brother and friend, i and you are not men of strife. have his tablet copied with 3 affiliated traders as witnesses and ...
to enna-suen and ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: i left 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver under my seal in purušhaddum with ennānum son of abiya. we met each other on the road, and i said: give me the silver i gave to you." he answered: "i sent it to you with ataya." i seized ataya here and said: "the silver that ennanum sent to me with you, give me that silver." ataya said: "ennānum did not give me any silver. let him produce witnesses that he gave it to me, then i shall pay you 1.5 mina of silver!" seize ennānum there and have him give you the 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver under my seal. if ennānum refuses to pay you the silver, then state to him your harsh conditions. if ennānum says: "i did give it to ataya!" then have him swear in his witnesses to you, assist and take the tablet with his witnesses in the gate of god. let him bring it overland to me. seal x silver of ennānum's jointly and send it to me. to ali-ahum: my dear brother, if ennānum has not given the silver to you, send me x+1 mina of silver on your own!"
if (there is) good tin, i said:do not cut off x mina for him!" he answered: "i shall not cut it off for him." we had your pirikannus led to the villages. until this day indicate the price of the pirikannus and send one of your servants to šalatuwar to ... with the textiles, and then i shall clear your orders for you. do not act on your own authority since you have not written. also, concerning puzur-aššur, about whom you wrote, i have not caught up with him. i questioned his maid here, and they said: "he ... 40 talents of washed copper and two wagons ... the end of the missives from ali-abum ..."
from ikūn-pīya to šumma-libbi-aššur, ennam-aššur and bekaya; specifically to ennam-aššur: i owe you 1.6666 mina of silver. i left surety worth 1 mina 10 shekels of silver with you. i left 1 talent 0.5 mina of copper with you. ... for my debt ... of my debt ... have it paid from the month allanātum ... he refuses ... his witnesses ...
4.5 shekels of silver, belonging to šu-ištar, bēlum-rabi seized. bēlum-rabi declared: i take the responsibility vis-à-vis šu-ištar." before ennam-suen, before puzur-lah before kura."
400 bronze pins, 18 shoes, 34 children's shoes, 15 sets of straps, twice for men, 10 -vessels, 30 combs, ½ litre of olive oil - all this ennam-aššur and ali-ahum gave to our father.
0.5 mina of refined silver under my seal plus small goods worth 3 shekels of silver - all this, under my seal, i entrusted to ilī-tūram, the slave from azu's firm, and his partner šalim-aššur, and i sent it to ...-bāni, damiq-pī-aššur son of warad-ilišu ...
to itūr-ilī; seal of enna-suen.
when iddin-abum was dying and was staying in aššur-bēl-awātim's house, the representatives of ilī-bāni, wardum and his customers, came in(to the house) and ilī-bāni's representatives said: settle accounts with us!" - but iddin-abum answered: "keep your tablets, for my tablets are written and available. let my brother šalim-aššur come, and then settle with him. then my own representatives, šu-illil and amur-ištar may assist my brother. until my brother arrives no one may open my tablets." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger in the gate of the god. witnessed by akuza, by lā-qēp, by ṣilūlu."
4 shekels of -silver aššur-taklāku son of a'aya owes to šu-bēlum. reckoned from the week of aššur-taklāku and ememe he will pay within a month. if he does not pay when his term is due he will add 1 / 8 shekel of silver per month. year eponymy of aššur-nādā. witnessed by aššur-idī.
further, 6 sacks of grain, half wheat half barley is owed by wališra.
thus hinnāya, say to elamma and aššur-ṣulūlī: 3 packets with silver, weighing 40 minas ,and 2 minas of gold - it is in a . container that has been placed inside the bag - aššur-ṭāb ,son of aššur-karwa ,is bringing you. aššur-ṭāb must entrust it to you under my seal and the bag in which the is placed must remain in elamma's house under [my] seal. 1.5 jar of acorns ... of a big jar ,with 22 minas of refined copper ,put there between the acorns ,ilaliuman is bringing to you under my seal. separately a jar with acorns with the seals of šaktunua he is bringing you. the acorns he must entrust to you under my seal and they must remain under my seal. should the caravan have already arrived ,the ... must come here. here i have reached an agreement with the colony. if the textiles to you ,send them here and if they arrive [] ...""
thus šalimma, say to šu-ištar, and aššur-imittī, especially to aššur-imittī: please, my son, open my tablet coffer and take out of it the tablet of the debt of ilī-bāni and let šu-ištar bring it here. here he has started a fight with me and has offended me seriously. please, my sons, pay attention!""
we removed our father's sealings before ali-ahum son of elāli, iddin-aššur son of dan-aššur, and ṣilluš-dagān, and we checked the copper, and there were 47 talents of black copper. thereof 7 talents of copper was used for our father's grave. these men sealed it. 2 -textiles, 1 abarnian textile, 1 textile in the palace, 1 good donkey - we sold (this), and we shall receive 100 -ingots as the price of these things measured with the weight-stone of the palace. sealed by enna-suen son of ikuwa, by salliya son of iddin-aššur by aššur-nādā son of ennam-aššur, by damiq-pī-aššur, by man-mahir son of amur-ištar. man-mahir son of amur-ištar owes 30 talents of -copper from durhumit to šalim-aššur. on his arrival at šalatuwar one month will pass, and then he will send silver to his representatives, and they will pay the copper. if they have not paid, he will add interest in accordance with the tariff of the colony. sealed by šum-abiya son of ibbi-sīn, by šu-belum son of ilī-kurub, by salliya son of iddin-aššur, by enna-suen son of ikuwa, by his daughter haditum. enna-suen, his daughter haditum and ataya son of ikūn-pīya owe 2.5 talents of good copper to šalim-aššur. month ; they will pay in 2 months. they will add 1.5 mina per talent as interest. our father has deposited 7 textiles on his account in the colony office. 3 textiles cost 40 minas of good copper. i have paid it and deposited it on our father's account.
from salatuwar silver to the city i use to carry ... i went ...
... two ... sealed by hanu i personally left in timelkiya with ali-abum son of aššur-emūqī. send word to ali-abum so that he may give the textiles to you.
enna-suen lodged a complaint against dan-aššur. enna-suen said to dan-aššur: although your father has no claim on my father and your father's name is not indicated on the tablet, yet you detain me for a claim of 12 minas of silver and its interest. and you turn me over to a guarantor and also take things as security from me, so may it be like this: i have brothers. let him give him the tablet and if your father had a claim on my father, then i shall stand up for you with respect to the silver, my father's debt, together with my brothers. do not cause me trouble and make me spend a lot of silver!" formal lawsuit."
we will go on a trip and dadaya said as follows to aššur-nādā: the tablet concerning your debt is in my guest-house and together with your tablet concerning some 10 minas of silver the tablets concerning erišum are in my guest-house. give me at least 0.5 mina of silver and invalidate your tablet." aššur-nādā answered: "as the sons of yaya and the sons of erišum do not approach me ... give me the tablet under your seal, then i shall give you at least 0.5 mina of silver." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by idnaya son of ibaya, by ... son of aššur-imittī."
2 (unopened) letters of atata, son of mannum-balum-assur, addressed to me and to assur-ennam, son of kubiya; two (unopened) letters of our father to belum-bani, son of su-belum; a tablet (with the seal) of puzur-assur (son of ahuqar), that he will not come back on me, abiya and assur-taklaku; a letter of our father to salim-assur (son of ili-bani); a tablet of the city; a tablet about a balance payment due to me; a tablet about 1 mina of silver the working capital of assur-taklaku, son of assur-malik, son of ariya; a tablet about 1 mina of silver, the working capital of assur-taklaku, son of dadanum; a tablet about the ... of the wife of adaya about the price paid for a house; a tablet about 0.3333 (and 5 shekels) of silver the working capital of abu-salim and his brother edinaya; a tablet about 15 shekels of silver adida and her son; a tablet about 12 shekels of silver of azida, son of salim-assur; a tablet about 12 shekels of silver of ali-ahum, son of assur-damiq; a tablet about 8 shekels of silver of ikuppiya, the son of salme; a letter of nakile'ed, son of hanana; a tablet about 12.5 minas of copper of ennum-assur, son of siktihasuti; a tablet about 0.3333 mina and 8 shekels of gali-abum of the ruins; a tablet about 12 shekels of silver of assur-taklaku, son of ennanum; a tablet about 10 shekels of silver of iddin-istar, son of ali-ahum, ikraya; a tablet about 0.333 mina of silver of kura, son of ali-ahum of hahhum; a tablet about 10 shekels of silver of elali, son of amriya; a tablet about 1 shekel of gold of assur-idi, son of iddin-assur. in all 26 tablets placed in the big tablet coffer.
to aššur-nimrī and ali-ahum from ahiya: 2 tablets concerning aššur-taklāku son of malakaya, 1 tablet concerning 2 minas 10 shekels and a second one concerning 5 minas of silver, a debt-note - are among the tablets. as to the sealed tablets that are in lipit-ištar's safe in a sealed container, right when you arrive your claim should be made to them. ... of tablets ... and seal my tablets with your seals. seal both of the tablets; also, take them in the containers and give them to šamaš-rē'ī so he may bring them. confident of my tablets i seized aššur-taklāku's goods here and i also detain him. he, on the other hand, contests the tablets, so he says: if you do not bring my tablets, you will pay in accordance with what you claimed from me." urgent, send the tablets. do not hold back the tablets lest the man ruins my father's house. my dear fathers and lords, save me while i can still be saved. do not ... to lipi-ištar's safe ..."
ṣulliya owes 3 shekels of silver to ali-ahum.
from man-mahir and damiq-pī-aššur to ali-ahum: damiq-pī-aššur brought 1 talent 10 minas of tin under your seal. we sold it at the rate 7:1, and we subtracted 1 mina of tin. 7 minas 14 shekels of silver and 17 less 1 / 4 shekels of gold was cleared as the price of your tin, and we gave 15 shekels of silver as the transport tariff and the entrance fee for the tin to the colony office. damiq-pī-aššur brought 12 talents of good copper and 1 talent of . we checked the copper, and one mina was missing on each talent. today we checked your seal, and 8 shekels were missing. we sold your copper for one shekel of silver per mina. the price of the was 55 shekels of silver. the total of your silver, both the price of the copper and of the was cleared as 12.83333 minas 5 shekels of silver, and of that man-mahir took 1 mina 10 shekels of silver. damiq-pī-aššur took 22 shekels of silver. 17 shekels was either the transport tariff or the entrance fee - we paid it to the office of the colony. the remainder of your silver, 11 minas 6 shekels of refined silver, under our seals, damiq-pī-aššur brings to you. both the price of the tin and of the - in all your silver is 18.3333 mina and 17 less 1 / 4 shekels of gold, - all this, under our seals, damiq-pī-aššur brings to you.
... my journey was disrupted and my shipment never did come to you (fem.).
i paid 18 shekels of silver as the price for a kutānu to salliya. witnessed by anunuwa and ibni-adad.
thus elamma, say to lā-qēpum: 24 minas 25 shekels of silver, with 33 shekels of gold placed at the top of the packet, under my seals, šu-kūbum, son of šu-suen, is on his way to you. entrust it to an affiliated trader so that one may bring it with the next caravan to my investors and representatives to the city. 15 shekels of silver for iliya, 2.3333 minas for ennam-aššur, 0.3333 mina for dadiya [...] of silver [for / to ... i] paid [...] [that?] are under seal in a -container, [šu-kū]bum is bringing you; send them to dadiya and ennam-aššur. 5 minas (of silver) under my seal šamaš-bāni, son of akutum, brought you, satisfy with that silver the claim of šalim-ahum and keep the rest with you. if there is a possibility to invest textiles or to invest silver, deposit my share by taking it from (this shipment). should your trip to burušhattum, take place, then let the boy go with you, do not leave him behind. seize amur-aššur, son of [ilī-bāni, and make <him> pay the silver.""
from ... and lamassī to adida, ababa and ali-ahum: you have written and in your missive you said: aluwa must not delay a single day. let him catch up with me on the journey." today it is 3 months since we sent aluwa and until this day we have heard nothing concerning ... also, if your (plur.) father had not settled accounts in the city hall, when we said: "let him come when he wishes(?), ... to ... and ali-ahum: ... adida ... witnesses ... of my silver ...
0.83333 mina 1 shekel of silver, the price of 2 šulhus and 3 ordinary (textiles), is owed by the lady of tumliya.
... send him with tutaya and if there has appeared an opponent of your case there in the assembly, then drag šu-tammuzi, elaya and adida, who have been lying on my father's testament there, and with whose seals my father's testament has been sealed, drag them to the assembly have them open their mouths before the city assembly and act in accordance with the words of the tablet that has been entrusted here. my dear father, be careful!
to šu-tammuzi, elaya, aššur-massu'ī, kudātum, adida, lamassī and ennam-aššur from ennam-aššur: when sadly my father died i wrote to you with kudātum, saying: on the day that my father left (assur) he declared his testament with you as witnesses, and he drew up -documents for us. my dear fathers and lords, have a copy made of my father's will, what he decided for us, and give this cleared tablet to aluwa and send him with the first express caravan." i am waiting for your letter. let me hear your missives, so i can come, see aššur's eye and your eyes and clear my father's house (of claims). and as for you, let us settle your affairs. my dear fathers and lords, the investors are pressuring us here and they have seized the assets that my father left. there you have received a tablet with a verdict of the city concerning the silver our father owes to the city hall, plus a second tablet with a verdict of the city with regard to the lapis lazuli of the votive offering for aššur that we wrote to you about. confront the city and get a tablet with a verdict of the city stating that until they bring in the votive offerings and the silver of the city hall has been paid in full, no one among the investors of šalim-aššur may make demands. do this and dispatch the 2 tablets with verdicts of the city plus a copy of the testament, and hire an attorney and send aluwa and the attorney as soon as possible. those i am waiting for.as for me, apart from you, whom do i have?"
to mannum-balum-aššur from ab-šalim: a year ago ennam-anum's house chased out the girl, and they have treated her like a daughter who has no one to care for her. your father said to the man: a deposit of 40 minas of silver came to your house from my son. 1 talent of bronze (and) stores of grain belonging to my son are in your house." he is ready to swear by aššur's dagger against the man. they will come to your father's house to learn about your store, and they stand ready to take out your tablets. you yourself know the opinion of your father and your people. indeed they bring you your father's letter with slander. do not listen to your father's slander! write me in your own words whether the girl was chased out by your order, so i may know. i have sent you 10 letters. why does no letter ever come from you?"
to ... and iddin-aššur from ennam-aššur: x talents of good copper that you balanced there on behalf of our father ... 9 talents 20 minas of good copper i personally left to iddin-aššur and lila together with the -copper, and ... copper, ali-ahum (with) iddin-aššur left 20 talents 40 minas of copper and he debited him for it. it is desposited in the safe. of the copper that he left ... x talents 5 minas of good copper ... man-mahir ...
to inah-ilī and ali-ahum from ababa: 8 black donkeys, 1.5 mina silver and 6 shekels of gold belonging to ennam-aššur šalim-wardī and enišarum have brought there for purchases of wool. pay close attention and seize the donkeys and his goods there when they leave. we have dropped the matter with ilī-dan; he has paid us 5 minas of silver; we did him a favour (to lend him) 5 minas of silver to be paid in 45 weeks. he is to pay 1.6666 mina in 15 weeks, 1.6666 mina, his second installment, he will pay in 15 weeks (after that), and the full amount of silver he will pay in 45 weeks. your brother secretly whispered with ili-dan and showed a favour towards ilī-dan, without my knowledge: your brother is to give 21 talents of wool to ilī-dan, and ilī-dan will pay 6 minas of silver immediately to your brother for the wool. urgent, seize the goods there. here he has been delayed because of those goods, and thus he does not pay heed to the orders of your father's house. and as for me, this very day ... i am engaged in a conflict with him.
5.83333 minas of silver that zukuwa (and) ali-ahum balanced on behalf of amur-aššur son of babalānum ...
iddin-suen son of ibaya who had hired an attorney against šalim-aššur son of issu-arik, and had received a tablet from the city assembly about his extradition - (those two) settled (their differences) and swore an oath by the city in kanesh. iddin-suen swore on behalf of his sister, his brother and his father's sister. and šalim-aššur must not raise claim against iddin-suen or his brother for the debt of their father ibaya. the two must not raise claim against each other. for this matter they swore the oath by the city. month hubur, eponymy ali-ahum son of inah-ilī. witnessed by hurāṣī son of šēp-alum, by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by ṣilūlu son of uku, by atadiya son of ennānum, by aššuriš-takal son of aššur-rē'ī, by ennam-aššur son of merani, (by ...) son of nizum. not only did he remove his father's debt, but šalim-aššur must pay 3.3333 minas of silver to iddin-suen son of ibaya for the settlement of the matter. this case was settled before these men.
ennam-aššur son of šu-illil seized us against ennam-aššur and lā-qēp, and ennam-aššur son of šu-illil said to ennam-aššur and lā-qēp: why do you detain me? every single shekel of silver of the merchant's has gone as well as my goods." ennam-aššur and lā-qēp answered: "we hold you back on our own responsibility. pay the silver of itūr-ilī and produce your copper." ennam-aššur answered: "there is no more copper. as for the silver, before two witnesses you were paid in full." they touched our ears with what was sworn by the city. witnessed by šalim-ahum, by azunaya, by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur. the durhumit colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave a tablet with our testimony before aššur's dagger. "had my journey gone to kanesh, would you then hold me back?""
1.6666 mina of 'silver dust' kuliya, son of ali-abum, amur-šamaš, son of bēlānum, and ennam-aššur, son of šulmim-ša-aššur, owe to aššur-mālik, son of kurara. per mina they will add 1.5 shekel of silver per month as interest. who of them is financially sound and available is liable for the silver. month xi of the eponymy of abu-šalim, the trader, son of ilī-ālum. golden (figurines of) gods, to the number of 20, belonging to ilī-pī-uṣur, have been deposited as pledge; the gods have been put under the seals of the 3 . when they received the silver ṭāb-aššur, son of ilī-pī-uṣur, hudu-bēlī, his slave, and 3, liptānum qardaya, ennam-aššur, son of ikuppi-aššur, and amur-šamaš, son of pilah-anum, assisted them. in the presence of aššur-ennam, son of bur-suen, of ennam-aššur, son of ennum-aššur, of ennam-aššur, son of pilah-ištar. 1280 minas <of copper> kuliya, son of ali-abum, amur-šamaš, son of bēlānum, and ennam-aššur, son of šulmu-ša-aššur owe to aššur-mālik, son of kurara. month xi of the eponymy of abu-šalim, the trader, son of ilī-ālum. per month the will add an interest of 70 minas per (talent). who of them is financially sound and available is liable for the copper. they will weigh the copper with the 10-mina-weight of tarawazi. when they received the copper 3, liptānum, son of qardaya, ennam-aššur, son of ikuppi-aššur, and amur-šamaš, son of pilah-anum, (and) ṭāb-aššur, son of ilī-pī-uṣur, and his slave hudu-bēlī assisted them. in the presence of ennam-aššur, son of ennam-aššur, (and) of ennam-aššur, son of pilah-ištar.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, lā-qēp, enah-ilī and ennam-aššur: when the colony sent karwaya and pūšu-kēn as envoys to burušhaddum because of the blood-money for ali-ahum's son and the lost silver, i had the sons of ... stand up in the assembly ... ennam-aššur ... he will not set witnesses and will not conclude the matter. when we decided to go to the city i seized ennānum with uraya and amurrum-bāni as witnesses, and i said: ... if you can conclude the matter, then come and conclude it! if that is not the case, then you will not agree with my sons or with my representatives." i made clear to them what was sworn by the city. my dear brothers, for no reason he ... the matter ... let uraya and amurrum-bāni go down to the gate of the god ... ennam-aššur ... you have concluded ... you have ... from my joint-stock capital."
also, the textiles i am bringing are not for your clothes. concerning the matter of agiya that you wrote about, if i have been able to make him pay the silver i shall seal together with an affiliated trader and send it to you. if i have not been able to make him pay the silver, my messages shall come to you with his answer that he gives to me.
nab-suen owes 17 minas less 7.5 shekels (of silver) to issu-arik. reckoned from the week of sukkalliya he must pay the silver in 13 weeks. the silver and gold is in my house. witnessed by ennamaya, by ennam-aššur son of dada, by aššur-nādā son of amur-luṣu.
waldi-ilum gave me 2 minas x shekels of silver belonging to the lady.
the overseer of ... in luhuzattiya owes 45 shekels of silver to ali-ahum. 15? sacks of grain, half barley half wheat (are interest). he will pay the barley, the wheat and the silver at this (coming) harvest. he also owes 1 -textile of good quality.
... shekels ... of the silver ... i received.... 0.3333 shekel silver for the attorney ... for the bridge guard - all this i paid in kanesh. from kanesh to wašhaniya: 10 shekels of tin both for the inn and for our food ... in wašhaniya; the palace took 6.5 shekels of tin as import duty; 3 shekels of tin: the -official; 1.5 shekel of tin: his staff-bearer; 2 minas of copper for the inn; 3 minas of copper for the attorney" of wašhaniya; 6.3333 shekels of tin as import duty they took at the border of lahuta; 0.5 mina of copper for the delivery agent - all this concerning wašhaniya. from wašhaniya to nenašša: they took x shekels of tin as import duty; 2 shekels of tin: the -official; 1 mina of copper for the bridge guard; x mina of copper for our inn; 2.5 minas of copper: the "attorney" - all this concerning nenašša. in wahšušana šu-illil's son ... 0.3333 mina of silver ... he took on his account and as for me, textiles for 0.3333 mina of silver he took on my account. witnessed by alulaya, by enna-suen son of šu-anum. and until the day when ... 30 minas of copper for our food when they waited in durhumit for the attorney ababa; 10 shekels of silver was spent on our food. when they built a house in front of the grave where our father is buried, my expense was 2 talents of copper, and 15 minas of copper was the wages of the builder. witnessed by šu-ištar, by ... we shall pay him 5 shekels of silver. ... we shall pay him 5 shekels of silver ... when a tablet of 10 minas ikūn-pīya ... 5 talents 20 minas belonging to ennam-aššur for ... give to him on top of the copper. iddin-aššur and ali-ahum ... until today. "
ennam-aššur seized us against ali-ahum and showed him a missive that was not opened, and ennam-aššur said: is this tablet under your seal or not?" ali-ahum answered, having investigated it, saying: "yes, it is my seal. i sent it with you to our father's representatives and my own and yours, so why have you not shown it but kept it until today?" ennam-aššur placed the unopened missive in our hands. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by aššur-nādā, by hadaya, by šu-ištar."
pilah-aššur seized [us] against elamma and pilah-aššur said to elamma: with respect to your tin that you gave me, i will do you a favor: i will supply you in the city silver at a rate of (1 shekel) per 8 shekels (of tin)." pilah-aššur also said to elamma: "and when i go to the city will you then give me 15 minas of silver for my free disposal?" elamma answered him: "i will give it to you." in the presence of lā-qēpum; šu-bēlum and šarrum-adad, were my fellow witnesses. for these words the kanesh colony made me available and [i gave] my testimony before [aššur's] dagger."
as to the 4 minas of refined silver, when the silver falls into aššur-nimrī's hands he will give it to ali-ahum, and he will dispose of it for 2 months. if he has not paid when his term is up, he will pay an interest of 0.6666 shekels 15 grains. witnessed by bēlānum.
40 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, ennam-aššur entrusted to aluwa and enišārum in šalatuwar under seal. he said: bring it to my father šalim-aššur in the city!" he also gave 5 shekels of silver for their expenses. the wahšušana colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ilī-bāni son of amur-aššur, by ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar; tūram-ilī son of eddin-aššur was our (absent) partner."
200 measures of barley - by the 3--measure of ... he himself will complement (it in?) the city - are with ennam-aššur. 250 3-measure of barley - by the 3-measure of ... ... he himself will complement (it in?) the city - are with abaya. 42? measures of barley, by the 3 -measure of ... ... ..., are with aššur-taklāk. 104 3--measures of barley - by the 3--measure of ... ... ... - he himself will complement (it in?) the city - are with abaya. he shall measure it out now. three tablets. 8 3--measures of barley with ewarnum; 50 3--measures of barley - he himself will complement (it in?) the city - are with ennam-adad, son of šunāya.
to šu-illil and azu; sealed by amur-ištar.
sealed by the hahhum colony. the colony passed a verdict: if šu-bēlum and enna-suen, iddin-abum's sons, do not leave and meet with šalim-aššur and do not discuss in order to come to an agreement, then they must release the goods to šalim-aššur. aba was the arbitrator.
1 mina of gold i have as investment share in the joint-stock capital of our ali-ahum. 3 minas and 50 shekels of refined silver, belonging to myself, i had aššur-mālik, son of aššur-šamšī, in my name bring to hinnāya and then i also told hinnāya in my instruction: take it for your joint-stock capital and book the gold as being mine." i have now an investment share with him of 1 mina of gold."
to šalim-aššur, aššur-malik son of luzina and ikūn-pīya from šišara and ištar-lamassi: of the 2 talents 10 minas of silver, on which you agreed (with?) šu-bēlum enna-suen, anuli and kakuwa, the attorney, for your joint-stock capital in kanesh - also in accordance with what your father wrote for you in his will - (so that) you promised to pay 2 talents 10 minas of refined silver in the city - šalim-aššur will contribute the transport tariff and the import duty; also, the silver will cross overland in šalim-aššur's name - out of this silver pilah-ištar son of uzuwa brought 37.5 minas of silver; hinnaya brought 20 minas of silver; kuziziya brought 3 minas of silver; aduda brought 4 minas of silver; the rest of the silver amounts to 58.5 minas of refined silver. to ikūn-pīya: let him refine the silver and check it with the weight stones of the merchant, let him seal it and give it to you. also, set witnesses for him, confirming that the silver passes overland in šalim-aššur's name. šalim-aššur must contribute the transport tariff and the import duty. further, šu-kūbum is not reliable. he must return whatever silver he has taken. he has been expelled(?) in accordance with a verdict of the city and the attorneys.
3 shekels of silver due from the man from ebla, who took wool.
from ennam-aššur to šāt-anna:i have personally travelled to ilī-dan in kuburnat, and after i left man-mahir has taken a wife in marriage. i shall travel to durhumit for your sake, and we shall settle the manner. urgent, urgent, since he is about to act, do take care and guard every shekel of silver that you have available, as well as those of the girl, and keep it in your own hand. or, as to erradi, seize his silver, whether 20 or 30 minas and make (him) swear in order to and then when i arrive i shall personally advise you. urgent, guard it! also, do not get angry in any way. i myself brought you ... if you need it they may give them to you.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, ennā-num, inah-ilī, man-mahir, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: concerning the matter of ennam-bēlum ... the silver deficit on my tin and my textiles ... do not send silver to the city and make me unhappy. a strongly worded tablet with his seal ... if ennānum, aššuriš-tikal and hannaya have received tin and textiles according to my orders, let them send the corresponding amount in silver, so he may take it. ... to ennānum: either 40 minas of tin or fine ... with the palace ... to hattum ... in 2 or 3 months i shall deposit in your name, so make at least 10 minas of silver, and give a caravan (transaction) to my servant, and let at least 10 minas of silver reach me here; give also me a caravan, then i in turn will give you a caravan when i come up. for in your heart you know how earlier i have given you a caravan. my dear brother, save me while i can still be saved. why is it that ali-ahum has left my smuggling goods in hahhum? let him enter the smuggling goods on the narrow track, and let him convert the textiles to silver. that is why i sent aluwa. sell textiles to cover my fees and write a tablet about it. whereas brother or friend has acted in brotherhood with me over every last shekel of silver, they cannot let my smuggling goods be brought in together with their wool. clear all my goods and my wool and give me a caravan. that is why i sent aluwa.
salliya owes 12 shekels of silver to ali-ahum.
seal of the kanesh colony. the colony has passed a verdict: for all the goods that were entrusted to aššur-bēl-awātim, and which šalim-aššur had taken out, šalim-aššur will give a tablet bearing his seal to šu-kūbum. šu-kūbum will not raise claim against kurub-ištar. if anyone raises claim against šu-kūbum, šalim-aššur will clear him.
to ennam-aššur, sealed by ali-ahum and ...-ištar.
seal of tamuriya, [seal of ... ... ...],
...-aššur and šaha... x silver belonging to šēp-ištar ennam-aššur received for šu-[ištar]. 1 talent 20 minas of tin ... x -textiles and 2 minas of hand tin ennam-aššur received. 1 mina 8 shekels of silver and x donkeys ennam-aššur received. the proceeds from 9 and 4 undergarments ennam-aššur received. of all this that was placed before us ennam-aššur noted x mina of refined silver as owed by šu-ištar, and šu-ištar son of šukkutum must pay within 5 weeks to ennam-aššur. ... 5 and 30 minas of tin ... šu-ištar. if he has not paid within 40 weeks as noted down ... šu-ištar son of šukkutum must pay ...
to elamma, say, thus [...] and aššur-m[ālik?]: 4 talents of tin [with seals applied] in the city and [x -textiles]? lā-qēpum's []. thereof: 17.5 minas of tin without [()] 5 -textiles were taken in the palace. a written instruction on the basis of what you said to ...: "let him entrust the tin to an agent ...""
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, ennā-num, inah-ilī, adida, ennam-aššur, ali-ahum and amur-ištar: my tin and my textiles have come to you from the caravan of anninum's son. you have not sent me any silver from that! my dear brothers and lords, check my certified tablets and reach an agreement where possible with those of my customers you see. set terms where you are able to, so you produce my silver for me. set aside your own needs for just one or two days and clear my outstanding loans. 8 minas of silver owed by the man from tumliya - at the rate 2 minas in silver and 80 sacks of grain, half barley, half wheat, he will pay interest annually. he has held the silver for 4 years. 1 mina owed by šuppun-ahšu - he will pay interest of 20 sacks of grain annually. why is it that interest on the silver and the price of grain in silver from his interest from the man of tumliya has come to my partner kurub-ištar son of ali-ahum, but nothing has come to me? my dear brothers, reach an agreement with the man from tumliya and take my share of the silver. i do not need the interest. or reach an agreement with someone else and take the agreed amount in silver, and let the man from tumliya be responsible for this. my dear lords, save me while i can still be saved. if adida has arrived there, take care to send him with ... my servants. ... the balance ... my dear lords, save me while i can still be saved.
urgent, guard the goods of the merchant; and with regard to your message where you said: there are some old textiles" - urgent, the very day you hear my letter you and ilī-ašrannī should air all of the textiles in the store-room of a friend, and leave them for 3 or 5 days before you turn them over. do not let anyone else approach (them). do not hesitate for 10 days! i have sent uṣur-ša-ištar to enišārum concerning your tin. when they come back from zalpa, i shall send ali-ahum. i sent ilī-tūram to you with 0.5 mina of refined silver and small goods worth 3 shekels under my seal, and idnaya and aluwa are bringing you 17 shekels of silver under my seal, the proceeds from your textiles. your donkeys should be fed. "
seal of aššur-dān, son of ikūn-pīya, seal of iddin-abum, son of itūr-ilī, seal of aššur-taklāku, son of huliya. 30 <minas> of soft, ... ... ... ... woolfor making the weft aššur-taklāku, son of huliya, owes to lamassutum. he will send it from haqa within two months. if he has not sent it and has departed for? the city he will weigh out on his return one talent of soft wool for making the weft. month xi, eponymy of aššur-nādā, son of puzur-anna
thus ir'am-aššur, say to ikūn-pī-aššur, lam[assutum]? and ennam-aššur: 1 mina of silver under my seals, belonging to suen-nādā, you must give there to šu-labān and kurara and you must set witnesses that they received suen-nādā's silver. with 3 minas of silver of the trader, under my seals, i sent ellil-bāni, son of hannānum, to aššur-rabi. i hear that he is still staying there and if he has indeed not left to meet aššur-rabi, then unpack the silver and buy for me tin at 9 shekels per (shekel of silver) or as favorably as you can and send ellil-bāni and šamaš-ennam here with the first caravan. as for my tablets recording that i became indebted for silver to innāya, son of elālī, to ennam-suen, son of šu-ištar and to aššur-mālik, son of qa'ātum, i have sent them the silver, they are satisfied. are my tablets with lamassutum or does someone from my representatives have them in his possession? i have written you several times. why has no report of yours ever reached me and do you not keep me informed?"
to ali-ahum, uṣur-ša-ištar and zukuwa from damiq-pī-aššur: uṣur-ša-ištar and ṣilliya bring you 15 minas of tin under my seal. of that 5 minas of tin are votive offerings for aššur. my dear brothers, sell my tin for refined silver as well as you can before the caravan arrives, and the proceeds from the 5 minas of tin from the votive offering must be available in silver. buy , soft and pleasant, for the rest of my silver and let them be. if there are no , then let the silver remain under seal.
from buzuwa, ṭāb-ṣill-aššur and ali-abum to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: in accordance with your instructions we aired your textiles and your textiles are in order. your servants are bringing you 4 and 12 akkadian ones sealed by šalim-aššur. we entrusted 2 , 1 akkadian one and 1 thin textile to ali-abum and iddin-aššur in accordance with your instructions. the rest of your textiles: 14 half-packs and 2 top-packs seald by šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī. ilī-pilah is not here so we entrusted them to ilī-pilah's wife witnessed by 3 affiliated traders. for 1 mina of silver that you sent we bought wool for you. it cost 0.6666 mina 4 1 / 4 shekels. 5 cost 10.6666 shekels of silver. the rest of your silver is 5 shekels of silver. your servants there bring you both the and the wool. wherever your textiles were placed, he stood ready once or twice to make a break-in. make up your own mind. take care and make a decision concerning your entrusted goods.
to šu-ištar speak, this is what iliš-tikal says: since you were elsewhere i did not come back. should i owe you anything, i will pay (it) threefold.""
5 shekels of silver i gave to the servant of šu-kūbum when he went to wahšušana.
to ali-ahum; seals of ikūn-pīya and zukuwa.
puzur-aššur seized irma-aššur son of nide-bāni and puzur-aššur said to irma-aššur: look, may these men know that you must not raise claim against ennam-aššur for the 1 mina of silver for which ennam-aššur was booked as guarantor in timelkiya for amur-ištar." irma-aššur answered: "i shall not raise claim." witnessed by šu-ištar son of dadānum, by šu-kūbum son of uzuwa."
aššur-malik and i settled accounts, and ... he took 5 minas of silver on my account.
11 torn(?) sacks, 9 ropes with pegs ... ...
to ali-ahum, annina and aššur-malik from zukuwa: bēlum-bāni brought 73 -textiles to ..., my representative; further, mannum-kī-aššur brought 41 under my seal and black donkeys with 2 under my seal to my representatives - in all: 114 -textiles. further, we shall count the available goods in silver as owed by bēlum-bāni. 8 shekels of silver, 10 shekels of silver ... of my silver 0.83333 mina ... and worth 10 minas of ... at bēlum-bāni's arrival have the proceeds from my textiles paid and the silver corresponding to (what i agreed). send me word about how much he seals for you as proceeds from my textiles. my dear brothers, pay attention to my instructions. have (everything) cleared! if it is 0.5 shekel each, make him set it on a rider. send me word whether bēlum-bāni has come or not. as to the tablets concerning anatolians that i also left with you, make them pay the silver, and then let ali-ahum take it. to ali-ahum: i left you 0.3333 mina 7 shekels of silver; so, add 10 shekels of silver of your own so it is 0.5 mina 7 shekels silver. as to iddin-aššur, satisfy him! do not leave him.
ennam-aššur answered the representatives of ikūn-pīya son of aššur-bāni, saying to ikūn-pīya's representatives: ikūn-pīya has become indebted to me for 5 minas of refined silver, and to šu-kūbum's son ...the silver and its interest ... x -textiles and 6 ...-textiles belonging to itūr-ilī i gave him in wahšušana. i left him a tablet concerning 1 mina 5 shekels of silver, of ennam-rēṣum's debt; further, i entrusted 13 ½ minas of copper to(?) ennam-rēṣum. 1 talent 46 ½ minas of -copper ... in the office of the colony ...""
to iddin-abum, itūr-ilī, ennānum and ali-ahum from ennam-aššur: you have written me about dispatching our father's goods. here adada agreed with aššur-ṭāb son of azuzaya in šalahšuwa, and adada has travelled to kuššara to have the man swear an oath. he will get an oath from the man and then he will dispatch the goods of azuzaya's son on the narrow track. my dear fathers, if the orders of the colony and the palace are strict there, then we shall not let the goods enter for that destination. get every mina of -silver from our father's silver and send it here with an express caravan or with my servant, so our father's goods may be dispatched safely. my dear lords, take care to send my servant.
30 minas 10 shekels of refined silver, 13 donkeys, 31 bags, 41 saddlecloths, 11 packsaddles, 21 ropes with pegs and packing-racks ... i paid ... he gave him 0.5 mina of tin ...
from aššur-malik and šalim-aššur to šalim-aššur: before aššur-šadue came and before he brought your letter, šu-bēlum came - two months before aššur-šadue - and šu-bēlum seized šu-kūbum son of aššur-bēl-awātim and his brother, and led them to the city assembly, and then it was us who rebuffed the matter and said: their case is closed. he is reopening a matter which has been sworn by the city." the city assembly passed a verdict that šu-bēlum and issu-arik's daughter must not raise claim against šu-kūbum and his brother. šu-kūbum will go to kanesh to confirm itūr-ilī and you to šu-bēlum, (namely) that he entrusted the merchandise to you (plur.). since he raised claim against you for everything that had been sworn by the city, you are to come and within 1 year you are to open the case for your paternal house. beginning of the month bēlat-ekallim, eponymy elāli son of ikūnum. urgent, as to your tablets, your witnesses, your judges and those who settled your case - let he who will go to the city come here, extradite the one who will not go - confirm your tablets and your witnesses, come and open the case for your paternal house! if you have not come, they will take 4 talents of tin and 100 on your account. the tablets blelonging to him with his witnesses have been placed before the city assembly and they have entered the city hall and are in the city hall. he holds a certified tablet sealed by the king, stating that you are to come within 1 year and that you must answer his case. since the matter was concluded 2 months ago, we heard the tablets that aššur-šadue son of tu'imum brought, and we made enquiries but we will not go back to the city assembly. kuziziya brought 10 minas of silver; hinnaya brought 10 minas of silver and 20 minas of silver has been deducted from your debt. then later šu-bēlum came and šu-bēlum said to hinnaya: "i entrusted 20 minas of sealed silver to you." hinnaya without those who know did not confer with us, but said: "yes, you did entrust it to me. i shall ask, and if they did not bring it i shall buy it in a merchant-house and pay you." šu-bēlum said: "the 10 minas of silver that kuziziya brought, are available." hinnaya gave in in the matter and borrowed 10 minas of silver from a merchant-house and paid, and hinnaya got a certified tablet stating that it will be deducted from your debt. in all, 30 minas of silver will be deducted from your debt. send the silver to hinnaya so the interest will not hurt you. in the matter concerning aššur-bāni ... he turned to the city assembly and said: "a bribe!" had you been present would they (not) have treated his word like chaff? for the statement you made, namely: "let the city judge my case!" - you are to pay 1 mina 10 shekels of silver. as he claimed that it was a bribe, but did not prove it against you, if you had come, would he (not) be dead? we borrowed 1 mina 10 shekels of silver against interest and paid. send silver. urgent, do not act superior in this matter! come and clear your paternal house. what can your investors do for you? you have no answer for them except saying: "i have been extradited." you do not consider your losses. you do not seek your god's face. urgent, when you have heard the letter, secure your tablets and your witnesses, set out and come! in the sacred precinct you have been accused five times already! are you not ashamed? how long are you going to wait?"
when iddin-abum was dying and was staying in aššur-bēl-awātim's house, the representatives of ilī-bāni, wardum and his customers, came in(to the house) and ilī-bāni's representatives said: settle accounts with us!" - but iddin-abum answered: "hold your tablets ready, for my tablets are written and available. let my brother šalim-aššur come, and then settle with him. then my own representatives, šu-illil and amur-ištar may assist my brother. until my brother arrives no one may open my tablets." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger in the gate of the god. witnessed by akuza, by lā-qēp, by ṣilūlu."
say to elamma, thus šu-bēlum: the daughter of aššur-dān, son of zizum, has obtained an attorney from the city, who has left (and) is staying over there. if with the silver or copper that i sent up to you you have not yet made purchases, then remove the silver and let it stay where you are. should anybody raise a claim against you in order to seize that silver, the silver belongs to the colony. if he makes an attempt at a slave-girl or the house, the house and the slave-girls belong to the lady! say to the personnel of the lady that he must negotiate with them.""
to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur and zukuwa; seal of puzur-aššur son of aššur-dan.
iddin-abum owes 13 minas of refined silver to amur-ištar and aššur-imittī. reckoned from the week of karriya he must pay in 36 weeks. if he has not paid (in time), he must add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. witnessed by aššur-emūqi, by ennam-aššur son of menaya.
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, ennānum, inah-ilī, adida, ennam-aššur, ali-ahum and amur-ištar: my dear brothers and lords, the lapis lazuli that is the votive offering of aššur has been lost. assist the attorney and the servant and have the colony hear the tablet with the verdict of the city, and in accordance with the verdict of the city ... an express caravan ... and wherever the attorney interrogates, he may impose an oath and then search the goods. my dear brothers and lords, you must make an effort and do a favour to aššur and to me. and if enna-suen has gone overland by way of the narrow track, then confront the colony so an envoy of the colony travels overland to assist the attorney, in the company of the attorney, and wherever enna-suen may be they must ... in accordance with the verdict of the city ...
to ali-ahum, annina, aššur-malik, peruwa, azitariya, azul and muanika from zukuwa: a certified tablet concerning 1.6666 mina of silver, the debt of ...zi, the wife of ...; x minas of silver the maid of ... has recieved; 0.83333 mina of silver ... is owed by him. furthermore he should give 0.3333 mina to you and ... mina of silver. their tablets ... for their tablets ... terms ... he should give to you and ... i recieved personally. ... 0.6666 mina 5 shekels of silver alili ... shekels of silver and my maid taziza ... 0.5 mina 5 shekels of silver they will pay at the ripening of the grain. ... silver they will pay at the ripening of the grain. ... silver they will pay the second year. he will give 5 sacks of barley before the seizing of the sickle. write a tablet concerning 0.5 mina of silver and 5 sacks of grain (half of it wheat) as jointly owed by his wife and him. as to the tablet concerning 0.3333 mina 2.5 shekels of silver, the debt of the wife of šuliman, lurmea and haššuili and her son - their terms are exceeded by much. seize them and make them pay the silver and its interest. if you observe that they are unpleasant, then take (only) the agreed amount in silver. the silver is jointly owed by the three of them. the matter which in the aššur gate that halitka ... that you made me spend ... what you made me spend ... have the silver paid and ... write a tablet and then ... give to him. say as follows: ... the silver is the debt ..." "
seal of [... ... ... ...]-aššur,seal of aššur-taklāku, seal of qatātum. 4.1666 shekels of silverqatatum owes tothe creditor. reckoning fromthe week eponymy of kaziya and šu-kūbum he will add interest per month according to the regulation of the . ... ... ... ... ... ... ibni- ... ... ... ... ...
do not worry about a single shekel of your silver, and do not remove trust from your heart. if indeed that opportunity was open for me and i would indeed be free to go there, would then until this day, when aluwa came, at least 10 minas of silver not have come to you quickly with a fast transport? you know very well that they deal with any assyrian's joint-stock capital in that understanding, and that at least 10 minas of good silver results for them. you know that in wahšušana and šalatuwar those who do business realise at least 10 minas of silver for the capitalists. my dear father and lord, until your goods from timelkiya arrive safely in wahšušana, and i shall wait one or two months, i shall hold some 10 or 20 fine textiles from your shipment for the first sale for his clothes; then you must buy for me some 15 shekels of iron, pure and of royal quality, and send aluwa with an express caravan so i can go and meet with the man and i can secure my share of 10 minas each for you together with your colleagues. if the iron ...
20 minas of refined copper that remained from the price for kukra are owed by šamaš-abī to lamassutum. from the week eponymy of ēnah-ilī within 10 weeks he will pay. if he does not pay the slave-girl kukra is my slave-girl. month x, year eponymy of šu-suen, son of babbilum. witnessed by aššur-nimrī, by bēlānum, by amur-aššur.
thus kaniš, say to the -payers, our messenger kuliya, (s) durhumit, hattuš, tamnia (and) tuhpiya, (all the way) until nenašša: as soon as you hear our letter produce the dagger of aššur and impose an oath and whoever has sold meteoric iron to a palace or, having not yet sold it, still carries it with him, seize (from him) the tithe on the meteoric iron and his / its tax of 3 shekels silver per mina and let kuliya personally take it along. if the person in question protests and declares: the meteoric iron belongs to 'a man with an account'", still take the tithe and the -tax and let one come here to swear an oath by aššur's dagger then we will give him back the -tax. do not fail to produce aššur's dagger in the presence of kuliya and people shall not spare each other! whoever has brought in loaded donkeys via the -road in order to do business over there, even when he is a resident of a, make him pay 3 shekels of silver per mina and let kuliya personally bring it here. if he protests, saying: "i will go to clear myself in kanesh", still make him pay the silver and let him come here afterwards in order to clear accounts with us. he shall not make trouble against (us) here, he must pay the silver (t)here!"
i said to markuti, son of dadiya, son of ilāya, in zalpa, month xi of the eponymy year of kapatiya: a tablet of 0.3333 mina of silver, being the debt of your father, has turned up in kanesh. inspect the seal of your father at the top of your father's debt-note and then pay the silver and the interest on it". he answered: "if you really have in your possession a debt-note with the seal of my father i will inspect it and - how could i protest? - i will pay, (for) it is my father's debt". in the presence of elālī, son of aššur-ennam, of the house of galdaya, of amua, son of hamhamtum, of adadaya, son of abiya, son of bebē."
x shekels of silvr, further, 3 shekels of silver, the price of a sheep;
from lamassī to ali-ahum: why have you written me as follows: your eyes are fixed together on every shekel of silver. do not guard ...-ištar lest she leaves to come here." certainly, my father left her to assist me and guard my life. should then i covet a single shekel of silver and then release her? you will not place ... and i shall not release her. why does kalanašar say there: "your brother stood ready to destroy our father's house?" urgent, pay attention, stand by the attorney, ...'s representative, and ... the silver that ..."
seal of sukkalliya son of amur-aššur, seal of akuza son of šu-anum, seal of uraya son of manana. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave the tablet with our testimony before aššur's dagger.
say to elamma, thus aššur-nādā and aššur-imittī: 102 -textiles inculding those ... [for wrapp]ing, 4 talents [x minas of seal]ed [tin], 6 donkeys? ... as import-tax ... we paid. [instead of x minas] of tin we handed over to aššur-mūtappil 0.5 mina of silver. aššur-imittī took 0.3333 mina of tin. the lady took 3 textiles. 27 shekels was the price of a donkey, 2 shekels, expenditures? in silver, ah-šalim t[ook?]. 2 textiles of the harnesser. we will settle accounts with ah-šalim."
iddin-abum owes 24 minas of refined silver to aššur-bēl-awātim. reckoned from the week of libbaya and iliš-tikal he must pay within 20 weeks. if he has not paid (in time), he must add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per mina per month. if they write his tablet, he must book 6 minas of gold in the name of aššur-bēl-awātim. witnessed by aššur-malik, by alāhum, by amur-ištar, by aguwa.
as to the 1 talent 6.5 minas of good copper, the price of his silver, belonging to ilī-bāni, of which ennam-aššur paid half to iddin-aššur son of dan-aššur - ilī-bāni has been paid the copper in full. ilī-bāni must not raise claim against ennam-aššur. witnessed by ennānum son of ..., by bēliya, by šēp-ištar. ṭāb-ṣill-aššur was their (absent) partner.
šu-bēlum son of iddin-abum seized us in his case against puzur-ištar, and šu-bēlum said to puzur-ištar: you owe 16 minas of silver plus interest to my father. the silver and the interest on it has become a great sum for you. you pay 0.3333 mina per mina per year as interest." puzur-ištar answered: "your father received my hides so he has been paid." we sat down (to negotiate) on behalf of šu-bēlum and they swore an oath by the city and agreed on 8 minas of silver. witnessed by nimar-ištar, by ennam-aššur; aššur-nādā son of šu-illil is our (absent) partner. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger."
from šukkutum to uštahšušar: if you are truly my maid, then do not listen to anyone else and do not become angry ...
the plenary assembly of the durhumit colony gave a verdict: on the day that ennam-aššur leaves, annina must go with him and give him his testimony in the kanesh colony, to the best of his knowledge together with his co-witnesses.
12 shekels of tin, its transport tariff, 1 mina 12 shekels of washed copper, 0.83333 mina of copper from ore - in all: 2 minas of copper belonging to iddin-suen.
from enna-suen to ali-ahum: 11 talents of washed copper, 10 minas of washed copper under my seal, also an - of that an - all this, belonging to the merchant, i entrusted to būr-suen, iziz-mišar and ... and they lead it to you. let them ... the to you in the make silver for ther merchant in accordance with the instructions.
to the merchant and zukuwa from puzur-aššur and damiq-pī-aššur: as you instructed us we broke annina's seal and checked 2 talents 8.3333 minas of tin. thereof ṣilliya and uṣur-ša-ištar bring you 1 talent 4.5 minas of tin under our seals. the rest of the tin, 1 talent 3.83333 minas of tin, we left in the house of the priestess under our seals and the seal of ṣilliya. as for the tin we left, 5 bars weighed 1 talent, 1 bar 3.83333 minas. give 2 minas of copper to the servants and let them bring it to the inn where the tin is. i shall pay attention to your instructions.
to šu-tammuzi, elaya, abada and lamassī from adida and ali-ahum: under the seal of man-mahir son of amur-ištar (and) enna-suen son of iddin-abum itūr-ilī gave 18.6666 shekels 15 grains in the form of rings of iron to ennam-aššur. from here and from there it will pass overland in the name of ennam-aššur. he shall sell the iron and for the 22.5 minas of silver that lā-qēp (owes to a merchant, the name of the merchant has been announced: ennam-aššur is the merchant.) the iron will be sold and ennam-aššur will recieve 22.5 minas of silver, and then itūr-ilī will recieve the rest of the silver. if he has not sold the iron ennam-aššur will return the iron to itūr-ilī and itūr-ilī will pay silver for it to ennam-aššur. itūr-ilī gave 0.3333 mina of beads(?) plus 2 good to ennam-aššur for purchases. from here and from there it will pass overland in the name of itūr-ilī. in accordance with the certified tablet that i hold ...
from enna-suen and ennam-aššur to ummaza and tutaya; from enna-suen to ummaza: my dear brother and friend, you and tutaya, pay attention morning and day towards lā-qēp as you would be persistent towards your own affairs and mine, assist lā-qēpum in accordance with our missive that we sent to lā-qēpum and ešu-bāni, and take care to react at the first assembly- meeting and confront the city, turn back to the city concerning the joint-stock capital since the orders of the city are strict, and the tablet abroad has been superseeded, and get a tablet with a verdict of the city stating that since the will of šalim-aššur of the city lies around, the tablet of šalim-aššur in which he spoke his will when he passed away, and which was entrusted to iliya son of elāli, that this tablet will be invalid. get a tablet with a verdict of the city stating that the tablet which was entrusted to iliya is invalid and that the sons of šalim-aššur shall go to the city with the attorney and debate on the basis of their will (made) in the city. get a tablet from the city with this content and send it with tutaya. do not cause him any delay. here we are agreed with tutaya. write his name in the tablet from the city. to ummaza: take care to assist lā-qēpum and get a tablet from the city. we too are men capable of doing favours. we shall show you one! tutaya brings a belt for your waist.
from aššur-šamšī and dadaya to ali-ahum: ilī-wēdāku brings you 1 mina of silver under our seals. take 10 shekels of extra-fine lapis lazuli for me. for the rest of the silver seal carnelian, half of it heavy, half long - it should be big! - and give it to ilī-wēdāku and send him with the first travellers. we are men who can do favours.
annina seized us against bēlānum and bēlānum said: 5.5 minas of silver under our seals, belonging to us both, that ... to adad-bāni and ibni-adad to ... annina ... annina's silver ... witnessed by ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur."
14 shekels of silver owed by daraši; 13+x shekels of silver owed by man-mahir; i paid 0.3333 mina 5 shekels of silver on behalf of lulu; 7 shekels of silver owed by iddin-kūbum, the son of the envoy; take 0.3333 mina of silver of my silver and give it to daraši.
let them (fem.) read aloud this tablet which is pleasing to you.
1 shekel of silver owed by ilī-rabi.
... fodder ... ... fodder ... ... 5 donkeys ... their fodder(?) ... i paid.
from šalim-aššur, pūšu-kēn and sabasiya to iliš-tikal: kulumaya is bringing you 16 minas of silver, its import duty added, plus 1 mina 17 shekels of -gold, its transport tariff paid for. the gold is of extremely good quality, even here it costs 10:1 (in silver). buy 4 talents of tin, its surplus and its wrapping - the wrapping should be either -textiles or different(?) ones - and for the rest of the silver and dispatch it with the very first transport so it reaches me for inspection and thus encourage your merchant. may every shekel of silver be realised for it, as it is not your silver. the donkeys should be good. we entrusted on commission to an agent your merchandise transported by baqqunum and katātum for 30 weeks, and he gave us this silver to have at disposal. take care to dispatch the goods with the very first transport. the donkeys should be with short teeth and tall of height. i entrusted the silver and gold to kulu-maya son of ataya. witnesses were imdī-ilum (and) puzur-aššur son of išār-kitt-aššur. he was paid the import duty.
... or my father's customer. as for you, do not obstruct me, and do not make me expend a lot of silver. complaint.
to šalim-aššur from ennam-aššur: of your goods that your representatives converted for me - even before you sent aluwa to me, three months earlier, your tin and textiles had been converted to copper, washed and of -type, and donkeys carried the copper quickly to šalatuwar. and as for me, i was afraid because of the and because of fear for my own head and the welfare of your goods i will not enter burušhaddum. with regard to the iron that you promised to the without sending any iron and thereby not calming the man's heart - don't you know that the man is hostile towards the father and will go to catch his father? aluwa brings you every shekel of silver that i exhausted myself to make in šalatuwar. for the rest of your goods, -copper and washed copper, i have outfitted wagons and turned to a trustworthy affiliated trader, who left with his wagons before aluwa 10 days ago, and he will buy silver, cheap or dear, and i shall send you what silver he clears before aluwa with travelers, so i can complete the proceeds of the goods i transported for you. i shall send you a final report. for the rest of your goods ... in kanesh .. your representatives ... that they sold, the silver ... in the city ... i shall clear the rest of your goods and then ali-ahum will entrust your goods from timelkiya in accordance with your orders, and i shall send ali-ahum with the silver and send you a reassuring message about your goods and your outstanding loans.
2 packages of 20 minas of refined silver, its import duty (added), its transport tariff paid - 12 shekels of silver under my seal: the working capital of nab-suen; 10 shekels of silver: the shipment of issu-arik - all this is for ennam-aššur son of dādum and nab-suen son of uzu. witnessed by elamma son of iddin-suen, by kula the brother of šukkutum, by kida.
thus hinnāya, say to elamma: of the 108 -textiles, including those of the harnessers, which you entrusted to aku, they brought me 75 -textiles. the harnesser declared: 'in the outskirts of the city one large bag (with textiles) got lost' and he reckoned it as yours. he also wanted to recoup a donkey from my donkeys and when ṣallāmun's son said: 'look, the donkey that is provided with a mark belongs to hinnāya!', he took the donkey along by force and the donkey he gave in its place is dead! as for the additional textiles that were taken when the import-tax was levied, if they will take them along for 16 shekels of silver apiece, let him pay you that silver. if it is less than 16 shekels apiece take as many of my textiles as were taken at the levying of the import-tax from his textiles and send them to me. an instruction of mine went to aššur-nādā and aššur-ṣulūlī to settle accounts with him. send me 1 šulupkian textile with an akkadian -garment and 2 of ... that are thin and yellowish. send me (also) the textiles i wrote you about, so that i can show them to šu-bēlum(?) and realize(?) the sale price of the donkeys, the šulupkian textiles and the -garment according to what they are worth. as for your textiles that are in zimišhuna, i will sell as many of them as i can and, moreover, as for ištar-pilah, to whom 2 minas of gold have been given, every shekel of silver he carries belongs to the . is he not our little brother? if you have with you an order of ali-ahum or of ... send me a message about it"."
... concerning what you wrote me, saying: 180 textiles including those for the wrapping, 4 talents 10 minas of tin, 14 minas of tin of the import tax, 4 textiles of the - of that 10 good textiles were missing - apart from the textiles from the working capital of the harnessors - as much as i spent on their working-capitals. and further, 0.5 minas that aššur-imittī received from halkiaššu, and, sadly, as many textiles ... and, further, ... halkiaššu ... were packed ... you have not written me ... from there you wrote me, saying: 1 talent of tin that they gave to us, of that they have paid out 1.5 mina at the rate of the caravan. instead of 5 minas ... to be satisfied ... you have done ... idnaya brings to you. my dear brothers, ... he will break the seals ... there ... when they lead my instructions. ... seal 4 ... of ali-ahum and ..."
to iku ... and zuzuwa, thus ali-abum: "what is this that i hear by rumour that amur-istar is troubling my household while he has already harmed me for an amount of at least 10 minas of silver? over there chase amur-istar out of [the house]. ... confront him with innaya, so that the latter can coax him along to the karum. please, my brothers, keep an eye on the girl and on the house. the maid might perish!"
seal of baziya son of ilī-kurub, seal of ahu-waqar son of zurzur, seal of irišum son of amur-šamaš. concerning irišum's debt: irišum owes x minas of refined silver to the merchant. reckoned from the week of ... he will pay ... shekels, the price of a sheep ... i also gave him 2 shekels. 1 mina from his tablet, 12 shekels on top, owed by ennānum the . ...
tūraya son of uzuwa has received 10 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-imittī son of dudiki, by enna-suen, by aššur-emūqī son of ikūnum, by aššur-ṭāb son of enna-suen, (grand)son of zalidī.
seal of hinnāya, seal of ikuppi-aššur, son of ennam-aššur, that elamma sent to lā-qēp 1.5 mina of silver as counter value of lā-qēp's outstanding claims. lā-qēp will take his silver (and) from it 5 shekels of silver, the price of 0.5 -textile, have been deducted.
to ikūn-pīya from ennam-aššur, iddin-abum and lā-qēpum: concerning the 10 minas of your silver that you sent, we paid 2 minas 45 shekels of silver for 90 soft ; we paid 2 minas 49 shekels of silver for 28 ; we paid 1 mina 6 shekels of silver for 2 donkeys; 0.6666 mina of silver we paid for a thin textile and an abarnian one; 6 shekels of silver for two ; the colony took 0.5 mina, the transport tariff on your silver. in all: 122 textiles, , , an abarnian and a thin one, and 2 black donkeys - adad-pilah is on his way to you with all this under our seal. of the 0.3333 mina of silver that you gave him, thereof he satisfied us with 18 shekels, 3.5 shekels were for his small goods, 1.5 shekel for the donkey harness, 0.5 shekel for 2 sacks, 1 shekel concerning the sheep you wrote about.
when ... 5 minas of good quality that i owed to šu-zuzu son of aššur-rē'ī in durhumit.
to ali-ahum; seal of amur-ištar.
what free loan ennam-aššur has given to enna-suen, or any certified tablet or memorandum concerning the debt of enna-suen s. of iddin-abum that he has produced - ennam-aššur's sons will sue him. enna-suen will not raise claim against ali-ahum or ennam-aššur's sons for anything at all. month mahhur-ilī, eponymy after that of enna-suen s. of šu-aššur. witnessed by šu-laban s. of dan-ilī, by luzina, by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, by a..., by bēlānum s. of šu-aššur.
from wašunalam to šalim-aššur: when you stayed here you gave me your promise about some iron, and concerning that which i asked you for, you said: while i am staying here i shall write so they may bring you the iron." urgent, take care to send me the iron you promised me. "
thus kanesh to kuliya, our messenger (and) every single , wherever sukkaliya, son of aššuriš-tikal, is staying. say to sukkaliya: tin for a value of 1 mina of silver, we gave you two years ago, with the words: 'send as soon as you have entered wahšušana the silver here with the first opportunity. you treated the as if it were not the and failed to send the silver here. it is up to you to comply, the cannot give in!' as soon as you(pl.) have heard our letter do not go outside (the colony), seize his quarters and let one distrain property of him worth 1.5 mina of silver and let on bring it to you. then send the silver with our messenger kuliya. have no consideration with the man!""
as to the 17 minas of silver that puzur-ištar owes either to a merchant, to anatolians or to ištar-lamassī, wife of ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur, and for which a tablet has been certified - from the week of hannan-nārum, month ab-šarrāni in the eponymy of enna-suen son of šu-aššur the silver will stand; it will not draw interest. years ... i shall sue him. on the day that they show the tablet concerning puzur-ištar's debt to puzur-aššur's representatives have not paid the silver, then the silver draws interest in accordance with his tablet. šu-ištar represented ištar-lamassī. witnessed by bēlum-bāni son of aššur-bēl-awātim, by damiq-pī-aššur son of warad-ilīšu, by lā-qēpum son of puzur-šadū'e.
šalim-aššur seized us against amurrum-bāni, and šalim-aššur said as follows to amurrum-bāni: keep in mind what has been sworn by the city and the king!" he impressed this on us. šalim-aššur then said: "the 2 minas of gold that ... invested in you on behalf of our father's firm ... the one-third profit ..." amurrum-bāni answered: "who are you to (claim) my profits? ... iddin-abum his name ... those who have a share in me and iddin-abum's ... house let them clear the tablet from the city and impose my profits. indeed, you (plur.) should keep in mind that i am suing you (sing.) for 29 shekels of gold from my votive offerings that i lent you - for the gold and its travels!" šalim-aššur did not answer him; he ... him. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by azu son of puzur-aššur, by irišum son of amur-šamaš; ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of alili was our (absent) partner. "
to šu-ištar from ennam-aššur and ...ri: you wrote me, saying: šamaš-bāni is bringing you 50 minas of tin under my seal." we unpacked 1 package of your tin and found there to be 22.5 minas. šamaš-bāni opened your second bundle during the trip and took 0.5 mina for his expenses. the rest of your tin we checked as 23 minas. total of your tin: 45 minas; your tin was cleared. at 9 3 / 4 shekels per mina its value in silver was 4.5 minas 6.83333 shekels. šamaš-bāni brings you 4 minas 13.5 shekels of refined silver under our seals. as to the rest of the silver, either as the price of good copper or ... they spent (it) quickly on the production of nails. of that we gave 100 nails for his disposal, 4.5 shekels of silver for his small goods, 5.3333 minas of tin for his expenses. all this we gave to šamaš-bāni. 6 shekels of silver, the price of grain, for ... tari ... took 3 shekels."
... that we gave. witnessed by illil-bāni son of išīm-aššur, by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of aššur-bāni.
month allanātum, eponymy aššur-idī: the tablets of ilī-dan and salliya.
ennam-aššur has given 2 minas 10 shekels of refined silver, the price of tin belonging to a merchant, to tūram-ilī son of eddin-aššur. from here the tin will cross overland in the name of a merchant, and from there silver will cross overland in the name of the merchant again. further, ennam-aššur borrowed 0.5 mina of silver belonging to a merchant, from tūram-ilī. in all: 2.6666 minas of silver. reckoned from the month ... tūram-ilī will ... when he comes up from the city ... the merchant ... will cross overland. witnessed by ikūn-pīya, ah-šalim's packer, by ša... son of aššur-rēʾī.
2 supannus of 2 minas each, and a third supannu weighing 1 mina;in all: 5 minas of bronze under my seal i entrusted to amur-aššur son of kukulānum and sent it with him to kudātum and dan-aššur son of puzur-aššur to purušhaddum for purchases.witnessed by aššur-taklāku son of malakaya, son of ennam-bēlum.
concerning the fact that iddin-abum owes 24 minas of silver to aššur-bēl-awātim: his son šu-kūbum has sealed the houses where šalim-aššur lives and taken out the maid and the slaves; but out of the iron that šalim-aššur claimed at the city hall and which has been invested in iddin-aššur and which he sent to kanesh, šu-kūbum son of aššur-bēl-awātim has taken šalim-aššur's share to cover iddin-abum's debt, and he has released the houses, the maid and the slaves to šalim-aššur's representatives. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by akuza, by amurrum-bāni, by lā-qēp; itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar is our (absent) partner.
... 0.5 shekel aššur-malik ... will balance;
to išdu-kēn from aššur-muttabbil: your goods are safe. ... goes well. 5 shekels of silver and 5 shekels of tin of 20 shekels ... i incurred an expense of 7 shekels; also, the 5 shekels of silver that you had promised to the father(?) we did not give him. the road ... he returned ... he said: ... he gave us a powerful attorney to ulama against my enemy."
dādiya son of ennānum has received 8 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-imittī son of dudiki, by tūraya son of uzuwa, by enna-suen son of iddin-abum.
to aššur-nimrī from kurub-ilī: the donkeys have been placed in the paddock. ... has been placed for 0.3333 mina. if you are truly my lord, send me the proceeds from my textiles. if you write to me in the city, send me both the proceeds from my textiles and the price of my servants. my dear brother, you can see that not a single shekel of silver is in my possession here. send me just a single shekel of silver for my food.
šarrum-suen paid 3.6666 minas of silver to the king of mamma on behalf of aššur-taklāku. 5 minas of silver is owed by uršiši; x + 6.5 minas of silver: kurub-aššur and ennam-aššur son of ṣilli-ištar; 1 mina 6 shekels of silver is owed by ilī-malik; x minas of silver is the working capital of ...zuba; 1 mina of silver is owed by ilī-nādā son of ilī-emūqī; 2 minas of silver is owed by išpun-ahšu; 30 šulhu-textiles are owed by amur-aššur son of iddin-ilum; 32 šulhu textiles are also owed by suen-ilšu; 10.5 shekels of pašallu-gold, confirmed (weight), ore, is owed by šu-suen;
the road-tax he incurs and the food of kitaya from burušhattum until the city elamma has paid. if he does not transport of the goods of elamma from the city kitaya will compensate (what was paid him for) the road-tax and food. in the presence of šu-ištar, of šu-aššur.
to ennānum and ali-ahum from puzur-aššur, specifically to ennānum: about the 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver under my seal that i left with you, you said: i gave the silver to ataya and they sent it to you." i seized ataya here and said: "give me the silver ennānum sent with you." he replied: "ennānum gave me no silver." i spoke in strong terms to ataya here. certify your tablet there with your witnesses to prove that you sent the silver with ataya. if you did not give it to ataya, then give the silver to ali-ahum."
from your representatives to ennam-aššur: šalim-wardī leads 21 talents 40 minas of copper and 1 talent 28 minas of good copper under our seals to you. we brought uot 21 talents 30 minas of copper from the safe. šalim-wardī gave us 3 talents of -copper. he will credit you there with as much as he received from your outstanding claims. in accordance with our previous missive about the copper from the safe 20 minas were in excess; in accordance with your instructions, we took counsel, and as for your missive that you sent to the colony, since you wrote 2 or 3 harsh words in your letter, we have not let it be heard. we thought: we must not allow them to take offense!" your missive is still here. when you come, ask for clemency, and they will be lenient with you. the pledges from puzur-anna's son are with šu-ištar. send word. the share has been sold for 1 talent 10 minas."
43 shekels of silver i paid to susāya on behalf of āl-ṭāb. in the presence of ennānum, the blacksmith, of ennam-aššur, son of butqum, of aššur-bēl-awātim, son of zuba.
to the merchant from šu-ištar: nab-suen and ewarimuša bring you 9 minas of refined silver under my seal, from the proceeds from the goods (mentioned) in my certified tablet. of that 1.5 mina 1.6666 shekel of silver was the price of lapis lazuli. 0.5 mina 8.5 shekels of lapis lazuli was offered for sale. my dear brother and lord, do not be angry with me because i held back. a man who is no good stands ready to defame me in your eyes. without reason he made the colony seize some 7 talents of copper. i held back until ... i keep imploring the colony, and i shall set out and come.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur and also puzur-aššur: in hahhum we set aside our goods for you. in zalpa and here we keep hearing that the narrow track is difficult. it is not a good idea for us to enter it. our dear brother, advise us whether we should dispatch to there (where you are) some 10 minas of tin and 10 textiles that we bring. we await your instructions. the very day you hear our missive send word with the first transport. advise us about securing some 10 textiles and some 10 minas of tin. until your instructions come to us we shall wait. our dear brother, take care so a clear message comes and ... will not ...
seal of iddin-adad son of aššur-ṭāb, seal of šu..., seal of aššur-...
to šalim-aššur; sealed by man-mahir. i have added 1.5 mina of copper to their account.
... he has against him. inah-ilī said: pay the silver!" the man wants to make me pay the silver. šu-ištar and ištar-lamassī keep holding me back here, saying: "do not pay your brother's silver and incur his anger!" inah-ilī said: "you have made and brought here some 10 minas of silver. pay the silver in accordance with your certified tablet." if you have not come within 10 days or have sent word to your representatives, i shall pay the silver to inah-ilī."
... here ... and the sons ... have been paid ... in order to give a tablet aššur-malik answered me before 10 men ...
2 shekels of silver owed by itūr-ilī son of puzur-anna; from wahšušana he must send two pairs of good shoes from wahšušana; if he has not sent it he is to pay 6 shekels of silver. witnessed by kabātum son of aššur-rabi.
seal of zuba, son of ennānum, seal of puzur-adad, son of iddin-ištar; ali-abum, son of ziya, was our companion. for these words the kaneš colony made us available and this tablet we gave as our testimony rendered before aššur's dagger.
keep in mind what was sworn by the ciy and the king! mannum-balum-aššur, i question you: the tablet concerning 5 minas of silver and its interest that aššur-taklāku owes to his brother puzur-anna, did puzur-anna leave the tablet for safekeeping with your father, or did he leave it with you yourself? deny or confirm it!" this is not a formal lawsuit but a witnessed statement. ennam-aššur sues for the silver of his merchant. mannum-balum-aššur answered, saying to ennam-aššur's representative: "puzur-anna son of šu-illil owes me 4 minas of silver. i have his certified tablet. since puzur-anna would go overland, i said: 'appoint someone responsible to me for your silver.' puzur-anna answered: 'who shall i appoint for you? here, take a certified tablet worth 5 minas of silver, the debt of aššur-taklāku son of šu-illil, lay claim to it and make aššur-taklāku pay, take the silver and the accrued interest paid, and then i personally shall take the silver.' ... you say: 'did puzur-anna leave the tablet for safe-keeping with your father or with you?' i do not seek litigation or strife. let ennam-aššur swear on aššur's dagger that puzur-anna left the tablet with my father or with me for safe-keeping, and that he did not leave it with me for me to lay claim. let him swear that he did not personally know that it was deposited for 4 minas of silver. ... in the tablet ... if he does not swear, no one ... šu-illil ..."
three minas of tin under the seals of ikūn-pī-ištar, son of ikū'aya i entrusted to ilī-ālum, son of sukkalliya, in the presence of šu-kūbum, son of qa'atum (and) of aššur-mālik, son of ali-ahum. seven minas of tin belonging to kūn-ilum aššur-ṭāb brought away.
from aššur-massuʾī to aššur-nādā and ennam-aššur; specifically to ennam-aššur: aššur-nādā should satisfy you with regard to the wife. give regularly 5 shekels of silver for her clothes and her provisions to mula. i shall send what there is to send to you, so you can be satisfied with the silver you are entitled to. guard my tablets. i shall send you a complete report from the city. ...
šu-bēlum son of iddin-abum seized us in his case against puzur-ištar son of dada, and šu-bēlum said to puzur-ištar: you owe 16 minas of silver and its interest to my father. the silver and the interest on it has become a great sum for you: you pay 0.3333 mina per mina per year as interest." puzur-ištar answered: "your father has already received hides so he has been paid the silver." we sat down (to negotiate) on behalf of šu-bēlum and they swore an oath by the city and agreed on 6 minas of silver. witnessed by nimar-ištar, by ennam-aššur; aššur-nādā son of šu-illil is our (absent) partner. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger."
iddin-abum owes 8 minas of refined silver to kula. reckoned from the week of happi-ahšu and sukkalliya he must go to the city within 25 weeks and together with his investors he must book kula's name for 2 minas of gold. if he has not left for the city within his stipulated term, he must repay the silver to kula. if he has not paid (in time), he must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per mina per month. witnessed by aššur-bāni, by iddin-suen.
seal of ippilis, seal of aššur-nādā, son of amur-ilūssu, seal of lā-qēpum, that elamma and idnāya settled accounts in our presence (with the following result): 35 shekels of refined silver and 13.5 minas of [refined] copper are due by idnāya. they become interest-bearing for him at the rate stipulated by the colony from the week-eponymy of amriya and elālī. 1.5 mina of silver, an earlier interest, (and) 0.83333 mina of silver, expenses, about which he wrote him repeatedly, he also owes.
alili, the man from tumlia, owes 11 minus 1 / 4 shekels of silver to ali-ahum. reckoned from the week of the -official he will pay interest at the rate of 1 shekel per month. month bēlat-ekallim, in the eponymy after that of aššur-imittī, the skipper. witnessed by waldi-ilum, by inar.
ennam-aššur has seized 36 talents of wool belonging to ilī-dan that was in irʾibum's house. he said: you must not release it. if you release it, in the house...""
0.3333 mina ... of refined silver is owed by the ladies.
seal of aššur-bāni; to šuppinuman son of mala...
seal of ibnī-adad, seal of idnaya, seal of azuzaya. concerning puzur-šadu'e's working capital: any tablet that may appear is invalid - one with irišum's seal.
from belulu to ah-šalim: when you left i gave you 1 mina of silver. of the textiles, of the carnelian, of 1 mina of iron ... when ...-bāni left earlier i gave (him) 1.5 textile. i said: give it to ah-šalim!" he said: "i gave it to iliya.""
seal of šu-nūnu son of amur-ištar, seal of zuzu son of ennam-ilī, seal of amurrum-bāni son of šu-ilabrat, seal of šu-bēlum son of ilī-bāni. šu-bēlum son of ilī-bāni owes x minas of silver to irišum. he will pay within 2 months. month narmak-aššur-ša-kēnātim, eponymy after that of amur-aššur son of karriya. if he has not paid he will add interest at the rate 3 shekels per month.
the 3.3333 minas of silver that our father gave to puzur-suen as an investment-loan in the eponymy ilī-bāni; the 4 minas 4 shekels of silver and 180 nails that our father gave to azuza as an investment-loan ...
for 34 kutānu-textiles they will balance me 3.83333 minas of the holding; 1 mina 53.5 shekels of the one-third parts i will take in the first instance. 2 -textiles pūšu-kēn will balance me of the caravan of pilah-ištar, son of uzua.
5 tablet containers with certified tablets; further, 2 containers belonging to iddin-abum and one container belonging to iddin-aššur; further in one container is the tablet concerning pūšu-kēn's house and one tablet concerning šu-anum's house. in all: 11 tablet containers; aššur-massu'ī left them together with those of his copies and missives in his house.
waldi-ilum brought 5.5 minas of good copper to the lady from tumliya.
ennam-aššur son of sukkalliya has received 18 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-imittī son of dudiki, by ... son of ennānum, by ku... son of ištar...
tuwar-ahšu owes 0.3333 mina 2.5 shekels of silver (and) 20 loaves of bread to ali-ahum.
2 donkeys for 33 shekels of silver, 2 donkeys for 25.5 shekels of silver, 1.5 shekel of silver from the price of a textile, when he bought a tisabu-garment for his wife — in all 1 mina of silver due from alutani husanalum, witnessed by hunadadu'a, his son-in-law and the ... of alutani, and bazazaya. 45 shekels of silver, the price of 2 donkeys asdunani husanalum owes, witnessed by hunadadu, by hurdunani, by bazazaya. 0.5 mina of silver, the rprice of 2 donkeys owed by nanali and ubarzaya, his brother, witnessed by usubuhamazaya, by dumeni, by hunadadu'a, by bazazaya. 24 shekels of silver the price of 2 donkeys, owed by kuliya, the retailer, witnessed by bazazaya, by hunadaduam, by u'anamea, his partner, and by hasutayali. 0.5 mina of silver, the price of 2 donkeys, owed by bazazaya, witnessed by urdum, by aliya. all together: 3 minas and 9 shekels, your silver, they will pay in spring.
from aššur-šamšī and dadāya to ali-ahum: in accordance with your instructions we have concluded the matter with šu-illil, and šu-illil son of mannum-kī aššur has balanced 3 minas of silver with us. šu-illil will pay 1 mina of silver when he returns from luhuzattiya. when we asked šu-illil son of mannum-kī-aššur for the 3 minas of silver he said: i took it in accordance with my certified tablet." we answered: "amur-šarrassa paid you in accordance with your certified tablet. very little remains." he said: "amur-šarrassa paid me no silver." he contested the silver. we said: "in case amur-šarrassa did pay you and only little remains, will you then not pay ... on the mina?" he answered: "then i shall pay." we have strong witnesses against him. amur-šarrassa did pay him the silver. we have strong witnesses against him. you must make up your mind there. hanu brings you 1 mina of silver under our seals. the rest of the silver, 1 mina 15 shekels of silver, we transferred as a sacrifice and wrote his tablet about 1 mina 15 shekels for a year - 3 months ago. "
... bring to the merchant's representatives and let a purchase be carried out in accordance with the merchant's instructions, and have it brought out.
to adida, ali-ahum and kukkulānum from puzur-aššur: if - with respect to adaya, abubu's slave - his son enna-šuen is ready to sell him, then take him (as) slave. empty the into the hands of another. if dada refuses, then let him come to me. inquire about my wages of 1 or 2 shekels of silver so i do not squander it to others. my dear brothers, take him for me.
4.5 talents of refined copper, 1 talent and 20 minas of poor copper aššur-nādā, elamma and aššur-rē'ī brought out of the strong-room of amur-aššur. aššur-nādā entered on account of his own (claim on) silver, elamma and aššur-rē'ī entered in the name of the investors, aššur-nišū entered representing kura. witnessed by aššur-nādā, zikayi, arši-ah, kukkulānum, and elāliya. they inspected his tablets and they were also the ones who sealed them (again) and brought them (again) into the strong-room.
seal of babazua son of šu-anum, seal of ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of ali-ilī, seal of šu-ištar son of aššur-lamassī. the durhumit colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
18 shekels of silver galu and kuluman owe to peruwa. in successive years they will pay each time 6 shekels in the presence of kilinuman.
a tablet concerning 3 minas 15 shekels of silver, the debt of anuli, has been entrusted to agiya son of puzur-aššur.
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur, puzur-aššur and ṣilliya: with respect to hinnaya's son about whom you wrote, we seized hinnaya's son here and said: pay ali-ahum's silver!" he answered: "annina is on his way to kanesh. annina will pay him the silver in kanesh." have annina pay you the silver there. we questioned annina, saying: "about the silver, is it you who will pay?" annina answered: "do not seize anything from išma-aššur. it is i who will pay the silver in kanesh to ali-ahum." with respect to kukkulānum about whom you wrote, we seized him here and said: "he gave you 0.5 mina of silver of his votive offerings. pay the silver and the purchases made.""
24.3333 minas of silver and 1 mina for 3 textiles, 7.5 shekels for a donkey, for 12 textiles 4 minas, for 1 -textile of kūn-ilum 11 shekels - elamma. 23.83333 minas and 1 mina for 3 textiles - šu-kūbum. 1 mina 15 shekels [will b[alance] [...] elamma [...] 2 minas 10 [shekels] šu-kūbum will balance to me. after the balance payments by hinnāya and šu-kūbum have been deducted i will balance 42 shekels to the colony.
i owe 1 talent 20 minas of good copper from tišmurna to šuzuzu.
the kanesh colony has passed a verdict, stating that šalim-aššur and amur-ištar's son shall seek out their witnesses, and within 10 months they shall negotiate where they agree. month kanwartan, eponymy kūbiya.
we checked 1.5 talent 0.6666 minas 5 shekels of tin after we gave the import duty.
to ennam-aššur from lā-qēp: šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī checked 22 talents of wool for us, and they counted 94 fleeces. in accordance with your instructions šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī bring you 0.5 mina of silver. they also lead 10 black donkeys and their harness to you. we gave 1 mina of copper for their expenses.
42.83333 shekels of silver is still due by them
to ennam-aššur from ali-ahum and amur-ištar: sadly, our father has died. it is not šalim-aššur who is our father, it is you who are our father. take care there of our father's instructions and clear up the affairs. you shall not transfer any consignment of our father's to this place. one or two of our investors are staying here. our dear father and lord, clear it up.
seal of lā-qēp son of šu-aššur, seal of kura son of iddin-aššur, seal of aššur-lamassī... lā-qēp son of šu-aššur owes 12.5 minas 5 shekels of refined silver to a merchant. reckoned from the week of kudātum, month tē'inātum, eponymy aššur-malik son of ali-ahum, when the (moon-)god reached the fifteenth day, he will pay the silver 2 months after his arrival in kanesh. if he has not paid in time, he must add interest at the rate of 1 shekel per mina per month. his second tablet: seal of ilī-muttabbil son of amur-ištar, seal of lā-qēp son of puzur-šadu'e, seal of lā-qēp son of šu-aššur. lā-qēp son of šu-aššur owed 10 minas of refined silver to a merchant. reckoned from the week of itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar, month bēlat-ekallim, eponymy after šu-suen, he must pay the silver within 12 weeks. if he has not paid the silver within his stipulated term, he must add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony per mina per month. these are copies of the certified tablets that we have. seal of man-mahir son of amur-ištar, seal of enna-suen son of iddin-abum. itūr-ilī gave rings of iron weighing 18.6666 shekels 15 grains to ennam-aššur. they will pass overland from here and from there in the name of ennam-aššur. he will sell the iron and for the 22.5 minas of silver that lā-qēp owes to a merchant, the name of the merchant has been announced: ennam-aššur is the merchant. the iron will be sold and ennam-aššur will receive 22.5 minas of silver, and then kura will receive itūr-ilī's silver. if the iron has not been sold, ennam-aššur will return the iron to itūr-ilī, and itūr-ilī will pay his silver to ennam-aššur. 0.3333 mina of ... and 2 kutānu-textiles itūr-ilī has ... to ennam-aššur.
... on the additional tablet ... i owe 12 minas of ... what shall i give you?
say to kuliya, thus says ababaya: here, as for the 1.3333 mina of silver which we borrowed to suppliment the amount of sabasiya's house / firm, my guarantors, which assisted me, all five of them, are complaining. they say: give us a tablet with your seal to the effect that the silver has been paid for kuliya's expenses; we have borrowed the silver at an interest of 7 shekels per mina." please, provide your father with 5 shekels of silver and each of your folks with one shekel of silver and let me no longer hear their complaints! please act as the gentleman you are! please give silver to aššur-ṣululī to bring to me. here they are frightening me."
1.5 shekel of silver for aššur-malik;
ennam-aššur seized us against inah-ilī, and ennam-aššur said as follows to inah-ilī: in front of ali-ahum, my brother, yes, in front of my brother you must stand. do not kill me(?) and do not ... i do not owe you anything; i am not held in esteem by you. once or twice ... your blood-money ... keep in mind what was sworn by the city! bring my case before the city and my lord. witnessed by aššuriš-tikal son of sukalliya, by atata son of ..."
by adad's order: mihhu-beer and flour offerings.
seal of ababa; to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur.
to mannu-kī-aššur son of aššur-ṭāb and ahātum daughter(!) of šinanātum; sealed by uṣur-ša-aššur son of šu-kūbum.
iddin-abum and šalim-aššur settled accounts with us as witnesses. as compensation for 10 minas of gold, issu-arik's investment that had been invested in šalim-aššur, iddin-abum gave on behalf of issu-arik ašdu's house and its legacy to šalim-aššur. ašdu's house and its legacy belongs to šalim-aššur. witnessed by lā-qēp, by akuza. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.
from kududu to muza and ennam-aššur: i gave 17 minas of copper to our harnessor kanaya but he has gone into hiding. seize him there and take hold of 2.5 minas of silver (per talent) and make him pay the silver. aššur-rabi brings 1 mina of sickles under my seal for muza. pithana has brought you 2 shekels of silver under my seal; further, i gave 5.6666 minas of good copper as his salary to him as well. to ennam-aššur: we seized my own tin and had 7 minas of silver sealed. we entrusted it to aluwa; for you and for the witnesses the silver there ... as soon as you have my tablet ...
22 talents of wool, 94 hides, 10 black donkeys, further 12 saddle-cloths from inside the house plus their harness - all this under my seal i entrusted to šalim-wardī and šēp-ištar. further, 8 shekels of tin, 40 bronze pins, 10 pairs of shoes, for children and for women, 8 straps, 10 combs (2 of boxwood), 50 , worth 0.3333 shekel, 6 -vessels and for 0.3333 shekel - all this i gave for them to dispose over.
aššur-rabi son of mannum-šumšu has received 3 minas 16.1666 shekel of silver on behalf of aššur-malik son of luzina from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by ilī-ašrannī son of sukkalliya, by enna-suen son of iddin-abum.
seal of ennam-aššur, son of ištar-lamassī, seal of inib-aššur, son of pilah-suen, seal of puzur-ištar, son of ilī-nādā. 3 shekels of silver puz[ur-ištar, son of ilī-nādā] owes to the creditor. from the week of šu-kūbum and kaziya he will add 1 / 8 shekel per month as interest. month iv, eponymy of the successor of adad-bāni.
...na seized aššur's dagger and aššur-malik son of šamaš-nāṣir heard his statement. aššur-taklāku son of a... was his (absent) partner.
seal of ilī-ašranni, son of aššur-ṭāb, seal of šu-suen, son of dadum, seal of ennam-bēlum, of the remainder of the debt of ir'am-aššur. in month i, eponymy of the successor of aššur-nādā, to / within [... ... ... ... ...] he will pay, [if he does not pay] [1.5 shekels per] mina, in accordance with the regulation of the colony he will add as interest per month.
seal of hanunu, scribe, of lipit-ištar son of lālum and of uṣur-ša-ištar; to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur.
agia brings you (fem.) 3 shekels of silver. puzur-aššur brings you (fem.) 3 shekels of silver. to ištar-lamassī: the proceeds from the (will come) with your servant.
give 1 mina of silver to aššur-mālik and we will deduct it from the assets of the joint-stock capital that we control. give 2 minas of silver as a free loan to kudānum; 0.5 mina of silver for kulumāya ... ... ... ... ... ... ...; 10 shekels for a thin textile of lamassī.
15 shekels of silver is owed by irišum son of amur-šamaš. reckoned from the week of innaya son of elāli he will add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony.
to šazua, šalimma and bitaya ...
thus elamma and aššur-dān, say to amur-ištar, aššur-nādā, and kūnilum: 7 minas 12 shekels of silver iddin-ištar brought here. we checked it and it was 7 shekels less, 13 shekels loss by purifying. we sent 1.5 mina silver to meet ištar-pilah, the transporter of hinnāya; 1.5 mina of silver we sent for the son of ahātum, the transporter of [kūn-ilum. elamma sent 1 mina for būr-suen, the transporter of the ; 0.5 mina of silver for aššur-dān, the transporter of hinnāya. elamma also sent; 33 shekels of silver for iddin-suen, the harnesser of karwāya - we gave it to him because he over us in a conflict, - from the balance payment of the caravan of aššuriš-tikal, son of sukkalliya, and 10 shekels of silver he owes, (for) he used it for his own balance payment. as for hinnāya's harnessor who took care of the transport from the city, he (hinnāya) paid us (for) his 3 textiles, his working capital, and we balanced him 4 1 / 8 shekels of silver. 20.5 shekels of silver for fodder for hinnāya's donkeys, we fed (them) this fodder. 11 shekels of silver (and) 1 mina of tin we gave to ilī-uṣranni for his expenses. 8 shekels of silver for būr-suen; we settled accounts with him and gave it to him in the name of hinnāya and the . 5 shekels of silver for we sent to ištar-pilah, the transporter of hinnāya. 49 shekels of silver of hinnāya elamma paid; 11 shekels he paid out of his own means and 1 mina of silver he sent under his seal to iddin-suen, the [transporter of hinnāya. separately 3 shekels of silver of the tithe hinnāya owes to elamma."
to kukuziya, lā-qēp and anna-anna from ennam-aššur: as i instructed you, if aluwa and ašeʾe have left hanaknak, then buy soft for what silver they conduct; or make the best purchase you can see will realise every shekel of silver, and until i come the purchase should remain. i am on my way. keep an eye on my store-room.
šalim-aššur and šu-bēlum son of iddin-abum settled accounts before us, and šalim-aššur set down 1 talent 13 minas of bad copper as a claim on šu-bēlum. šalim-aššur said to šu-bēlum: on the orders of issu-arik, my father, i wrote myself as your father's guarantor. i took silver from his outstanding claims and paid to cover his debt, and i paid a great deal of silver from my joint-stock capital for your father's debt. come! let me show you my tablets!" šu-bēlum answered: "why do you inform only me? sue me together with my brothers." witnessed by puzur-aššur, by ennānum. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave (our testimony) before the dagger of aššur. "
seal of aššur-emūqi, seal of ennam-aššur son of menaya, seal of iddin-abum. concerning the debt of iddin-abum of 13 minas of refined silver. reckoned from the week of karriya he must pay within 36 weeks. if he has not paid (in time), he must pay interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. concerning amur-ištar and aššur-imittī.
from ikūn-pīya to ennam-aššur, iddin-abum and lā-qēp: ennam-aššur brings you 10 minas of silver under my seal. in addition to 40 minas of tin which ennam-aššur will send, add my silver and buy worth 2 minas of his tin - in addition to the one mina, and until you will make purchases for me ..., set aside the tin and send it as soon as possible. until my servant arrives, with the rest of my silver make a profitable purchase of good from talhat, (and) soft and send them to me. his donkeys ... per year together with my customers ...
to kurub-ištar, ikūn-piya, šu-ištar, adida and amur-ištar from šalim-aššur; specifically to kurub-ištar: my dear brother and lord, the lapis lazuli that was the votive offering to aššur has been lost. you and your caravan must listen to the tablet with the verdict of the city assembly, assist the attorney and the servant, and search enna-suen's goods in accordance with the verdict of the city, and if the lapis lazuli appears, then place it under seal and return the lapis lazuli and enna-suen in accordance with the verdict of the city. according to the verdict of the city wherever the attorney interrogates, he may impose an oath and search the goods. also, if anyone has departed with an express caravan, the attorney will travel and search the goods of the express caravan. my dear brothers and lords, save me while i can still be saved. do this favour for aššur and for me.
concerning the 1.6666 mina 5 shekels of sealed silver that šu-hubur left with ali-ahum - annina has received the silver on behalf of aššur-bēl-šadu'e. if anyone raises claim against ali-ahum for this silver, annina son of puzur-anna will clear him. witnessed by aššur-bāni son of kutaya, by ilī-bāni son of amur-ištar.
to ennam-aššur from lā-qēp: i and ennānum entered your storeroom and brought out your bronze and the tablets, and they are in itūr-ilī's house. do not worry at all. also, šalim-aššur ... the votive offering ... my journey to the city is approaching. if any silver has fallen into your hands, send it to your representatives so they can sell it on credit and i can do you a service. send me word whether or not any silver has fallen into your hands. if i do not depart, do not be angry with me. take care to send me word.
2 minas of silver, the agreed amount of his certified tablet, 12 shekels and 2 fine suppū-sheep, its interest, owed by happi-ahšu son of zilpuriya.
the judges passed the following verdict: the 6 shekels of silver that kapsiya, wife of ali-abum, had given to būṣi, wife(?) of iddin-adad, and for which from the eponymy of aššur-imittī, the boatman, she would add an interest of 0.5 mina per mina per year - for this silver and the accumulated interest on it kapsiya, the wife of ali-abum will sue būṣi, wife (?) of iddin-adad. akiya, son of puzur-aššur, šamaš-bāni, son of ennam-suen, (and) mannum-kī-aššur, son of ahu-waqar - these gentlemen were the judges.
iddin-abum has bought the houses by the well, where šalim-aššur is living, from tudhaliya the brother of tuli. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave a tablet with our testimony before the dagger of aššur. witnessed by akuza, by uraya, by aššur-bāni.
10 shekels of refined silver he will send to me reckoned from the week eponymy of of šamaš-bāni and aššur-mālik not later than the coming week-eponymy. should he not send it to me then he will pay 15 shekels of silver. in the presence of ennānum, of aššur-mutappil.
to issu-arik from šalim-aššur: i made our guest amuraya and our sister, the priestess, pay 1.3333 mina of refined silver, the proceeds from your carnelian, and dudu is bringing it to you under my seal. 2.5 minas 0.5 shekel owed by i..., x 0.5 mina owed by kuzāzum, 0.5 mina owed by aššur-bēl-awātim, all this, refined silver, from the proceeds of your carnelian, from these men, dudu will bring to you in hahhum. 2 minas less 3 shekels is your silver, 5 shekels belong to me. also, 2 ... and 2 shekels ... imdī-ilum brought you 2 minas 3 shekels including its transport tariff. about the 7 minas of refined silver, the proceeds of your carnelian - if he has taken interest from your merchant, then in accordance with the tablet of ... let dudu credit you for the price. 3.5 shekels of gold ore sealed by me as a shipment is being brought to you by dudu. 2.5 shekels of gold ani... the servant ... my dear father, take care and ship my goods to me, and ... may a final report from you come as soon as possible.
we broke the seals for 4 minas of silver that amur-šamaš sent, and (discovered that) 4.3333 shekels of silver were missing.
seal of šu-kūbum, seal of šu-ištar, seal of amur-ištar, that, when his tin comes up (from assur) elamma will send 2 talents of tin to šu-ištar in burušhattum and that šu-ištar will deliver in full to him 1 shekel (of silver) per (shekel of tin) above the current rate of exchange and that he will pay purified silver on the arrival of his tin.
to sūaya and ennam-aššur. seal of aššur-idī.
[15 shekels of silver] ennam-aššur gave to uṣur-<pī>-aššur. if in the city a tablet with the seal of uṣur-pī-aššur <in the city> their sister ummī-išhara <has / shows>, to the effect that he will not claim what her mother lamassutum had inherited and what had been left behind by her, then uṣur-pī-aššur will give back the 15 shekels of silver. in the presence of ēnah-ilī, of šalim-ištar of aššur-[... ... ...] of mas(s)āya, of aššur-mālik
8.5 shekels of silver due from ennānum, the blacksmith; 1 shekel of silver for buying bread i gave to you; 3 / 4 shekel of bad quality (silver) i gave you. thereof you have given me 10 minas of wool and 5 shekels of tin.
kid-ahšu and his sons owe 18 shekels of silver to ali-ahum. he will measure out 6 sacks (of grain), half barley, half wheat at harvest time. 15 shekels of silver is owed by haršumnuman; he will measure out 5 sacks (of grain), half barley, half wheat, at harvest time. waldi-ilum gave this silver. witnessed by happu-aššu, by mannum-balum-aššur.
x 0.5 mina of refined silver and further 1 shekel, its transport tariff - all this i gave to itūr-ilī son of amur-ištar, and this silver, sealed by him and sealed by ... son of ali-ahum, they entrusted to idnaya son of da...za and aluwa.
4 talents 42 minas of copper with iddin-aurum. 0.5 mina of silver, working capital of kitaya. 8 minas of silver with šuli, son of puzur-abeh. 4 minas 3.83333 shekels of silver with idnāya, month iv, eponymy of šudāya; he will add 1 1 / 4 shekel per (mina per month) as interest. 1 talent 20 minas of copper and 25 shekels <of silver(?)> with ibaya. 8 shekels of silver with ikūn-mīšar. 2 minas 10 shekels of silver with aššur-dūrī, year eponymy of iphurum. he will add 1.5 shekel per (mina per month). 0.5 mina of silver with balṭu'um. 25 shekels (of silver) working capital of galdaya. 1 mina of silver with galdaya.
thus aššur-šad-ilī, amur-ištar, ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur, ilī-anum, anuppiya, and ababayai, say to kuliya: we have settled your affair concerning sabasiya's house, includeing the setting of a term for you. and in addition to the silver and gold you had left behind we borrowed 1.3333 mina from ṭāb-aššur, son of ṭāb-ilī, at an interest of 7 shekels per mina. and with that silver we have satisfied them, whereupon they released to us 3 tablets of the city (and) 1 tablet recording a debt of yours of 1.5 mina of silver. your wife has sealed (the debt-note) together with us, (dated to) the ivth month of the eponymy of dān-ea. please, as soon as you have heard the letters, send the silver with the interest on it and then we will cancel the tablet with our seals and the seal of your wife. in accordance with your written instructions we seized išme-adad, son of itūraya, and told him: you brought 5 minas of silver, meant for making purchases, belonging to puzur-aššur, son of ahu-waqar. confirm our claim on it, then it is you who can make the purchases and we will establish our claim on them. if the silver turns out to belong to puzur-aššur, kuliya can take it." he answered: "puzur-aššur is in no way involved and i did not bring along any silver!" we led him down to the gate of the god and in the gate this agreement was reached: "henceforth, wherever you see him you will make him swear the oath." as for aššur-rēṣī, son of innāya, their affair still rests and we have not obtained a written document and (hence) we continue to detain him."
i gave [x] minas of -copper as wage of a porter until šaladuwar, 20 minas of -copper i paid in šaladuwar, 3 minas i gave to the inn, 10 minas of copper i gave to porters, 7 minas of copper i gave to tarkua, 3 minas of copper i spent until burušhattum, 3 shekels of silver in burušhattum i deposited for the as -tax, 3 minas of copper for expenses until ušbugattum, 3 shekels of silver i paid to the inn in burušhattum, 1.5 mina of copper from burušhattum until šaladuwar i incurred (as expenses), 10 minas of copper were spent until i left šaladuwar, [x] minas of copper were spent when (the donkeys) were stabled in wahšušana and at the inn, 1.5 mina of copper i incurred until tuhpiya, 3 minas of copper i incurred until durhumit. from durhumit until kanesh i incurred expenses of 5 minas of refined (copper), i spent 3 minas of copper until wahšušana, i acquired and spent small wares for a value of 4 shekels of silver.
to ali-ahum, annina and aššur-malik from zukuwa: x minas of silver, its import duty added, and x+0.5 shekel from votive offerings, under seal, šu-hubur brings to you. the silver passes overland in the name of ... šu-hubur should give you x+3 minas 2.3333 shekels of silver under my seal and a certified tablet with my seal, and then you (plural) must open for my tablets, give him his tablet from ali-ahum's (house) and place the tablet that šu-hubur gives to you among my other tablets and seal (the box) with your seals. and the bundle should remain with ali-ahum under my seal until i arrive. five times i have sent word to you concerning iddin-aššur's silver, but you have written nothing to me to inform me. you have not sent me word to inform me whether he has paid the silver and its interest or not. if he has not paid the silver i shall write so they can make him pay the silver and its interest, and as for you, with the first transport ...
to aššur-damiq from abu-šalim: the leatherworkers here who owe ... to luhrahna have received the hide of an ox from the amorites, and i am the guarantor for 1 ½ mina 5 shekels of copper. also, they promised ... for me, (but) they have given me nothing. here the amorites seized (them) with you as witness. seize them there and have them give you the copper. illil-bāni should send me ½ mina of copper. an ax has been deposited as security.
say to elamma and to kurub-ištar, thus iddin-aššur: 2 talents 10 minas of tin under seals, 50 -textiles, including those for wrapping (the tin), 3 black donkeys - all this ēnah-ilī entrusted to me (for transport). consider what to do with your merchandise.""
of the 0.83333 mina of silver and 0.3333 mina 5 shekels from the proceeds of a fine -textile, which i have as a claim on iddin-abum - thereof he has given me 1 talent 23.5 minas of copper, reckoned at the exchange rate 1 : 40 1 / 12.
0.5 mina of silver for iddin-aššur; 1.6666 mina of silver for ah-šalim, of which 0.3333 mina is for luzi, the slave of ali-ahum; 0.3333 mina for kudādum, the harnesser of [aššur?]-mālik. he will give it to them by my instruction. for 3 shekels of silver for ah-šalim.
22 minas: the house of aššur-imittī and hunniya; 20.5 minas: ilī-ālum; 10 minas less 15 shekels: šu-kūbum; 13 minas: the house of šu-illil; 13 minas the son of amur-ištar; 13.6666 minas 5 shekels belonging to lā-qēp son of kayatum; 6.5 minas: aššur-malik son of ennam-adad; in all: 1.5 talent 8.5 minas of silver from my joint-stock capital, including the which my investors have charged to me. for half the silver the terms have expired. for half the silver payment must be made in 4 years. eponymy ilī-dan. of the 10 minas of silver from his in my certified tablet belonging to šu-kūbum son of elāli he has received 5 minas of silver. witnessed by his wife, by his daughter, the priestess, by elāli, his son.
šalim-aššur's attorney seized us against ennam-aššur and ali-ahum, šalim-aššur's sons, and the attorney said: your father's investors kept the tablet stating which silver your father set down as owed by you, and the investors placed it in front of the colony. the colony entrusted it to me. come, in accordance with the tablet of the city pay the silver for which you were noted in the tablet, seal it and go to the city. do not cheat me." ali-ahum answered: "come, let us pay what silver our father set down as owed by us and then let me go with the attorney." ennam-aššur answered the attorney: "question me right here, and then i shall answer you and i shall leave right now." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by puzur-... son of aššur-ṭāb, by šu-aššur son of šu-suen."
from tūram-ilī to ennam-aššur and šu-kūbum; specifically to ennam-aššur: x 0.6666 minas of silver owed by ... ... 0.3333 shekels of gold: šu-kūbum's caraban; further, these x shekels of gold ... this silver ...
as for the 3 minas of refined silver that šu-ištar, nimar-ištar and buziya owed to aššur-malik, on behalf of aššur-malik šu-ištar has received the silver. if aššur-malik raises claim against buziya, šu-ištar will clear him. as to the 0.3333 mina of silver belonging to the lady and the 17 shekels of silver belonging to ilī-kurub, if they raise claim against buziya, šu-ištar will clear him. witnessed by dādiya, by šamaš-ṭāb, by tutaya. šamaš-ennam.
from lamassī to ali-ahum: a year ago the attorney brought your tablets and your strict commands, but as for you (pl.), you have delayed until this day! which day are you waiting for? you (plur.) do not come and clear the affairs of your paternal house, and the eponymn tries to seal up the house. urgent, if you are truely my brother, don't you keep hearing there that conditions here are harsh? do you not know that our father left me in an empty house, so we have to borrow money for food for the household to have something to eat? why do you not send me a single shekel silver in my name in a shipment? if you are truly my brother - as for me, whom can i look to apart from you? conditions are harsh in the city. urgent, as you hear my letter, clear yourselves, set out and come and save your father's house. if aluwa attends to you there, let him do so - or if that is not the case - hand him over for a working capital and send me the working capital . also, he owes me 13 shekels of silver - seize him and have him pay the silver and send it. adida brings you a thin textile, four cubits wide and ten long, under my seal. ... adida.
thus dān-aššur and ennam-suen, say to ir'am-aššur: 10 textiles with the seals of kulumāya ennam-aššur brought us. two of these are abarnian ones, one is -textile. since there was no possibility to sell them here and these textiles are affected by moth, ennam-aššur brought them into šaladuwar and he gave us 15 shekels apiece, the price made for them, and ennam-aššur is not on his way to you with 2.5 minas of silver under our seals. over there let āl-ṭāb get a judicial clearance with you concerning these textiles."
... that šalim-aššur left behind ... let us go to the city. yesterday i questioned you, saying: pay the silver that your father has set down as owed by you, and then let us go to the city. ali-ahum, your brother, answered: 'come on, i shall pay the silver that my father wrote for me in the tablet, and then let us go to the city.' but you, instead of paying the silver keep answering me harshly, and you are unwilling to pay the silver. do not obstruct me, but show me where your father's outstanding claims are, so i can assist you in having the silver paid, so we can go to the city. as for your brother ali-ahum, i hold the silver that his father wrote for him in the tablet. but you, you refuse to pay the silver that your father wrote in the tablet. so you cheat me. come, move, and pay the silver that your father wrote for you in the tablet, in accordance with the verdict of the city, and then let us go to the city. do not obstruct me." ennam-aššur answered the attorney ababa: "i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. yesterday you questioned me and i answered you, saying: 'when my father died in durhumit i was not present. my brother ali-ahum took care of my father. they appropriated things illegally, and my father wrote many things concerning me. i do not owe any of what is in this tablet to my father. come on, let us go to durhumit where my father's assets are, let us take these assets and let us go together with you to the city in accordance with the verdict of the city and let us satisfy the eponym, let me discuss with my brother and my sister the testament of our father that is in the city.' if you say: 'i will not go to durhumit, then speak up! come on! even today let us depart for the city. do not question me in court. i have not refused to go!" ali-ahum answered the attorney ababa; ali-ahum said: "i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. yesterday you questioned me and i answered you as follows: 'come along! let me pay what my father wrote in the tablet and then let us go to the city!' come, let me pay the silver today and then let me show you my father's outstanding claims, so assist me and let us have the silver paid and go to the city in accordance with the tablet of the city. i shall not obstruct the tablet of the city and the attorney of our lord. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by uṣurānum son of salliya, by aššur-taklāku son of aššur-muttabbil."
40 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, ennam-aššur has entrusted to aluwa and enišārum in šalatuwar under seal. he said: bring it to the city to my father šalim-aššur!" he also gave them 5 shekels of silver for expenses. the wahšušana colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ilī-bāni son of amur-aššur, by ahu-waqar son of šu-ištar; tūram-ilī son of eddin-aššur was our (absent) partner."
sealed by man-mahir son of amur-ištar; to ennam-aššur.
as to the 12 minas of good copper that labarša deposited for her as security because of the mill-stone - when ali-ahum demanded it from him and they had destroyed it, i paid the copper. also, i paid silver to the son of lā-qēp son of illil-bāni. 10.5 shekels of silver for the ; 3 shekels for the thin wood; 3 shekels for the stones; 2 shekels, the wages of a builder - all this i paid out for the expenses on the father's house.
šu-ištar owes x mina of silver to šu-suen. šu-ištar is held in service by the money. ... i gave him ... issu-arik in prayer(?), and revived his maid and his slave. witnessed by šalim-aššur, by iddin-ištar.
to ennam-aššur, ikūnum and amur-ištar from aššur-malik: seize bēlī-ṭāb there and conduct him here. if he refuses to come, question him and then let him look for hire (with others). impose a heavy verdict on ikūn-pīya. the slave must not be lost. take care!
22 minas of copper āl-ṭāb from tuhpiya owes to āl-ṭāb, son of aššur-ṭāb. in the presence of adad-bāni la-qēp paid the copper to mīšur-rabi.
say to aššur-rēṣī, dadiya and ennam-aššur, thus elamma: dān-aššur is on his way to you with 24 minas of refined silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid. if the rate of the tin is 15:1 or even more, then buy 2 talents of tin; if not, then buy -textiles. use 11.6666 minas of silver to buy -garments, thin textiles and šulupkian ones and send them with the next caravan. half a mina of silver, the working capital of bēlum-bāni, he himself has with him. if, when this merchandise leaves, the weather is cool, then entrust abu-šalim to the care of one of our brothers who will bring them! here safely, then he can leave. if the weather is hot he must not leave. i gave 5 shekels of silver of my to dān-aššur."
seal of ikūn-pīya son of eddinaya, seal of irišum son of amur-šamaš, seal of šamaš-ṭāb son of amriya. šamaš-ṭāb owes x minas of refined silver to hudida. reckoned from the week of pūšu-kēn and puzur-aššur he must pay within 3 weeks. if he has not paid, he must add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. month ṣip'um, eponymy elāli. the silver belongs to a merchant.
to damqaya from šāt-anna: you wrote concerning the 10 shekels of silver that i gave to you, saying: i made purchases together with the money from my working capital and sent it to purušhaddum." be so kind as to send the purchase you made to the city, for you are my brother and i can do you favors. "
seal of parrurtum; to iddin-abum son of narmea.
x talents of wool, x + 5 hides, x + 22 sacks, 4 black donkeys, 3 saddle-rugs for each, plus their harness - all this i gave to ewarimuša.
from ikūn-pīya, dan-aššur and šalim-wardī to ennam-aššur: dan-aššur has paid us 2 talents of good copper. he did not break the 3 blocks, and he promised to pay 15 shekels. we ... send his tablet. šu-nūnu brings you 3 talents of good copper from the proceeds from your tin and your textiles, (in all) 5 talents of good copper under our seals. we asked for copper from salliya's representatives but they would not give it. as to the you wrote about, there is no none. within 5 days šalim-wardī will be cleared and we shall send him. we gave him 3 minas of copper to dispose of.
seal of puzur-aššur, son of ikūn-pīya, seal of dān-aššur, son of puzur-aššur, seal of peruwa, son of šuppibra, seal of peruwa, son of arawa, seal of zaba, son of hanu, seal of lullu, son of hapi, <that is> lullu, son of hapi, who had married ištar-lamassī, wife of kūn-ilum. after the lady had died, their affairs were were settled and for the expenses made for the lady, and those made for iliya, who had been thrown into jail <and> whose expenses lullu had paid, for both those made for the lady, and those made for iliya, lullu, son of hapi, will not raise any claims against the sons of hanum.
8 talents 16.5 shekels of tin the declared value of iddin-suen('s merchandise). thereof: 41 minas 15 shekels of tin, including expenses for fodder. 2 shekels of silver and 2 shekels of tin i paid from timilkiya because a donkey suffered a stroke. 6 shekels of tin i paid from hurama until kanesh. 3 3 / 4 shekels of silver i paid in kanesh for straw. all this i paid in the name of iddin-suen, ? 34.5 minas of tin they had given me for expenses, which amounted to 3 minas 47 shekels per talent.
puzur-aššur and ir'am-aššur seized us in the city and ir'am-aššur said to puzur-aššur: you gained access to my tablets in wahšušana and you took a tablet of 45 shekels of silver of pilahānum, son of dannum-ilī, (and) you took a tablet of 15 shekels of silver of kaskanu'i.l". puzur-aššur answered: "indeed, i took (them). you, as my representative, and puzur-šamaš, son of šu-nunu, must then i will go [to inspect] my copies and memos ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...la, the son of šu-nunu [is bringing?] to you. to your [x mina] 1.3333 shekel of silver [i will ad]d 1 mina and send it to you and when you come here, we must clear accounts. for these words the kanesh colony made me available and before the dagger of aššur i gave my testimony. in the presence of buzāzu, son of pūšu-kēn; lipit-ištar, son of išme-aššur was my companion."
to my representatives and bēlānum; seal of ennam-aššur.
to ali-ahum and ikūn-pī-aššur from aliya: the tablets belonging to our father, one single tablet-container under my seal and aguwa's seal; also, further in both the -containers and ... and a single tablet-container sealed by our father ...
of the 75 kutānus belonging to enna-suen that they entrusted to lataya in the city, thereof he left 6 kutānus in timelkiya.
kulumaya, ataya, mannuba, šu-ištar ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur, balṭuwa, alāku.
aššur-taklāku received 8.3333 minas 4.5 shekels of silver from the caravan of pūšu-kēn; šar-suen deposited 13.3333 minas of silver in pūšu-kēn's caravan.
... your servant received the wool. let him give me the silver under your seal. if ... reached me i shall return the silver to you and then ... to kuššara.
to ali-ahum from aliya: i wrote you before, saying: as for the tablet concerning 4 minas 12 shekels of silver - you know (it was given) as a pledge to šu-aššur for 1.3333 mina 3 shekels of silver - pay the silver and then send me word so i may come." my dear lord, apart from the tablet of iṭiab-šināti that is with you, i have the tablet concerning iṭab-šināti's debt of 3 minas of silver, that he is to pay (in instalments) of 0.5 mina per year reckoned from the eponymy of ibni-adad. his son atata came there with amur-šarrassa. damiq-... will lead some one or two minas of silver. "
to the envoys of the city and the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony; from šalim-aššur: my dear lords, the scribe of the burušhaddum colony, ibaya's son, and a servant of ušinalam brought a tablet from the plenary assembly of the burušhaddum colony and a tablet from ušinalam to the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony concerning the slave abu-šalim, and they said: the slave abu-šalim owes 16, 040 minas of copper, the price of wool, to ušinalam. as to the 30, 000 minas of copper from the others that they owe to the palace, he has angered ušinalam." they continued: "abu-šalim must come. if abu-šalim is absent, then his master must come. here we fear for our lives and abu-šalim's silver." all of the envoys from the city and the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony heard this and you said: "you must go and satisfy ušinalam." you handed me over to ilī-bāni, huraṣānum, the scribe of the burušhaddum colony and ušinalam's servant together with my merchandise that had arrived from the city, and you said: "go! satisfy ušinalam!" after i had paid 15, 000 minas of copper as the price of the wool to ušinalam and satisfied him, he returned and handed me over to the palace officials for 40 minas of silver to cover the same abu-šalim's debt. i said: "it is you i have already satisfied, so the -documents are mine, or they are part of my goods and he has sold (them). take the -documents you gave me and sell them where you wish. why do you hand me over to your ?" he answered: "i will not take your -documents, but you must pay 40 minas of silver to the ." i said this to ušinalam before your envoys and the plenary assembly of the burušhaddum colony, but he refused. my dear lords, ... the tablet [from the burušhaddum colony] and the tablet from ušinalam that ibaya's son and ušinalam's servant brought, that the envoys from the city and the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony heard, and on the basis of which tablets they led me away and i satisfied ušinalam - both those two earlier tablets which the envoys of the city and the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony heard and which have been entrusted (for safe-keeping), plus the tablet, a missive from the plenary assembly of the burušhaddum colony, that ilī-bāni and huraṣānum bring to the plenary assembly of the kanesh colony - those three tablets you must seal for buziya, the envoy from the city, and entrust them so that he brings them to the city. if buziya has left, then entrust them to a reliable affiliated trader. you gave me a tablet, saying: "go and confirm the witnesses, so either in the kanesh colony or in the burušhaddum colony ... the price of the wool of ušinalam...."
to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur and puzur-aššur: they satisfied puzur-aššur here for the deficit on the silver. the silver belongs to damiq-pī-aššur. our dear brother, exert yourself there and make waliya, aššur-bēl-šaduʾe's packer pay the silver. the silver must not go missing. to ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: they have satisfied puzer-aššur before clearing me. he will pay the silver in the name of damqaya. puzur-aššur is not concerned. send me word to where i am staying when you have recieved the silver.
to ali-ahum, annina, bēlum-bāni (and) aššur-malik; specifically to bēlum-bāni from zukuwa: ... from hahhum ... all this ... for me ... to šalatuwar ... x mina 8 shekels of silver ... concerning him ... 1 / 4 shekel of silver ... 42 -textiles ... their harness ... to ... šalatuwar ... mina 5.5 shekels and ... a certified tablet ... 2.6666 minas ... per mina he will add as interest. as his term is exceeded, make him pay the silver and its interest. do not fear ... mina of silver belonging to the maid which is in his possession and make him give that too. ... 0.5 mina 1 / 4 shekel of silver i gave 2 years ago; now i seized him in kanesh and said: give me my silver!" he said: "you wrote to ikūn-piya, your agent, and i gave it." i answered: "in case you have not given it to ikūn-pīya, will you not pay per 0.5 mina 1 mina 7 shekels?" he answered: "i shall pay you." i bound him over with bēlum-bāni (and) hanunu son of ennam-aššur as witnesses. get the silver from him in accordance with the contract. do not make him any favors. total of my silver: 5.3333 minas 7 shekels of silver and interest - make mannum-kī-aššur pay that. my dear brothers, send me word about what silver and interest you recieve from bēlum-bāni and mannum-kī-aššur and ... for my house. thereof 2.5 minas ... give it to ali-ahum's son and ..."
3 minas 42 shekels of tin owed by aššur-rē'ī. in the presence of aššur-dān, of ir'am-aššūr.
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: i left 0.5 mina 2 shekels of silver under my seal for ennānum son of abiya in purušhaddum. have him give you the silver under my seal. let it remain in your house. 1.5 litre of fine oil, a belt and a girdle (and) -spice - all this kalka, the slave of the scribe šu-suen brings to you.
i gave 3 minas of tin from my votive offering for purchases to amur-ištar with aššur-imittī as witness.
tablets concerning our iddin-abum's debts.
3 minas of wool when i gave 1 mina of wool to the native of 'birds-town'. 5 minas of wool which i had brought from tegarama. 5 minas of wool of the karum-office. 1.5 mina of wool, a gift which i offered to suen. 2.5 minas of wool a gift which i offered to anna. 9 minas of wool from what ennum-assur had given me. in all 21 minas i left to the maid.
to ali-ahum from adi...: as to the fact that until this day ... you do not feel anger towards me, ... x minas 15 shekels ... within five days i shall set out and come. my dear lord, write a letter to the king in which you say: the silver was lost in my house." why have you kept silent and not taken action?"
0.6666 mina 5 shekels, an aze and its biltu;
to aššur-imittī from aššur-bāni: why do you keep writing me about silver? you say: “send me silver!” when you went away you left me 15 shekels of silver, and that was spent before kurub-ištar returned from tawiniya. you said: “go! i shall send you tablets worth some 10 minas of silver, so you can have the silver paid, then set out and leave.” instead of sending me tablets you warn me constantly whenever the merchant certified our tablets. and you know yourself that you left only 30 portions of food for me. from where shall i get anything so i can feed anyone under these harsh conditions? and i, as you know, i must feed and raise the son of šu-ištar, the maid and the slave, (and) you do not feed me, so i have become indebted for at least 1 mina of silver for the food for the household.
of the 130 -textiles - minus those of the packers and the -loans - that came down from the palace 65 textiles resulted for each of us as shares; thereof i gave 43 kutānu-textiles to ennam-aššur. the rest of your textiles: 22 textiles remain. of the 10 fine that are owned jointly by us, of that ennam-aššur has received 4 textiles; 2 textiles stand as joint property of ennānum and ennam-aššur. witnessed by turaya, by lā-qēp son of šu-aššur.
from ... to ennam-aššur: concerning what you wrote to me, saying: listen to(?) an affiliated trader and you will assume guarantee for him." with šu-aššur i did not assume guarantee for the investor. since a lot ... of silver ... you wrote and said: "ennam-aššur assumed guarantee for 40 talents of washed copper ... the representatives of the investors." ... copper ... 26 minas of silver ... a lot of silver ... to the investor ... urgent, do not worry at all. come so that we can decide what is fitting here. also, an attorney ... together with you ... do not at all ... the matter that ... the slave-girls ..."
sealed by tūram-ilī; to ennam-aššur son of šalim-ahum and šu-kūbum son of ennam-anum
to ali-ahum, baziya and maršana(...) from mannum-balum-aššur: here sukkalliya was booked for 1.5 mina 5 shekels of silver as abu-šalim's guarantor. he has laid claim to abu-šalim's slave. here i gave 1 mina of silver to sukkaliya on behalf of abu-šalim. for the rest of the silver abu-šalim has given him many things: abu-šalim gave a kettle weighing 15 minas worth 1 talent 15 minas of -copper to sukkalliya; he received 40 minas of copper from his outstanding claims. abu-šalim guarantees for kudātum's silver. if he says anything, such as: it was only for a minimum that i guaranteed, yet he owes me a lot", then let him appoint someone for you, certify and give him a binding tablet from those who were appointed. to ali-ahum: have him ... you the proceeds and send him."
tablet concerning enna-suen son of iddin-abum.
5 1 / 4 shekels of silver from the interest on 5 minas is still due. 13 1 / 4 shekels of silver, the price of our lapis lazuli, which i sold in šuppiluliya, is due from durhumit colony.
iddin-abum owes 14 minas of refined silver to amur-ištar. reckoned from the week of dalaš and duhniš he must pay in 43 weeks. if he has not paid at the completion of his term, he must add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. 5.6666 minas 5 shekels belong to aššur-emūqī. witnessed by aššur-imittī, by šu-anum. he will await the coming .
to kuziya, ṭāb-ṣill-aššur and šēp-ištar from ennam-aššur; specifically to šēp-ištar: i instructed you there, saying: pay attention to my outstanding credits, clear my credits before i come, and give at once the copper you receive to the care of my maid, and let it be deposited in my house." also, i left a copy of my outstanding credits to pn and šēp-ištar. 1 talent 4.5 minas of copper ..., 26 minas of washed copper, the price of a, further, 6 minas 10 shekels of prime washed copper - all this is owed by marušala. 27 minas of washed copper and 9 minas of bad copper - all this is owed by ennam-aššur son of aššur-bēl-awātim. 8.6666 minas 5 shekels of bad copper is owed by ṣilliya. 30 minas of washed copper owed by šu-aššur, the messenger ...; ... gave it and (when they have) counted it, it will be available. make him pay the rest of the copper. my dear brothers, look at the copies and clear my outstanding credits in accordance with my copies. šēp-ištar knows about my outstanding credits. send me word with ibni-adad about how much copper you have received from bēliya and what credits you have produced. instruct šēp-ištar about the rest of the copper that remains and i shall not obtain the outstanding credits. if abu-šalim leaves šalatuwar, let him leave ..."
lullu, ennam-aššur and abu-šalim, representing aššur-ṭāb, the son of elamma, seized us against aššur-ṭāb, son of ali-ahum, and they said: as for the price of 21 talents 9 minas of purified copper belonging to aššur-ṭāb, son of elamma, which had been deposited in your house, did you sell it?" aššur-ṭāb answered: "i sold it and its price, 17 minas and 53 shekels of silver, i have with me, it will go overland in the name of aššur-ṭāb, son of elamma". in the presence of uṣur-ša-aššur (and) of ikūppiya. for this testimony the burušhattum colony made us available and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger."
0.3333 mina 2.5 shekels of silver is owed by alwana.
to ṣilulu, ikūn-piya and aduda from šalim-aššur; specifically to ṣilulu: you asked me for 1.6666 mina of refined silver for his fees and aduda after ... including 10 shekels of silver ... my dear brother and friend, for this silver buy grain and let it be in your own house under seal. let him receive the grain until i arrive, so i shall not enter an empty house.
(if) for his working capital he does not do the packing you (plur.) must not hire him. when you entrust merchandise (for transport). (must it be) to a perfidious men, who replaces / represents? aššur-lamassī? buy from my funds akkadian textiles for a value of 1 mina of silver? as for a harnesser, when you are hiring one, (even) when it concerns (only) 3 textiles of fine quality and do not entrust them to ...""
51 dark textiles of iddin-suen, 35 textiles of aššur-rē'ī, 32 textiles of šu-ištar, 15 textiles ennam-suen, 6 textiles (of) ah-šalim, 2 textiles (of) ilī-bāni, 2 textiles (of) the merchant, 2 textiles lā-qēp - in all 142 textiles.
6.3333 minas of copper and 0.3333 mina of tin is in aššur-taklāku's possession. 2 minas less 5 shekels of copper is in šu-kūbum's possession.
from the kanesh colony to the trading station at kuburnat: here the sons of šalim-aššur confronted us and said: ilī-dan amd salliya sons of iddin-aššur owe silver to our father. the men have spoken harshly. we take responsibility for their forced transfer." let the men there be extradited together with šēp-ištar, our messenger ,and you must be the executive arm for our messenger."
ali-ahum answered the attorney ababa, saying: i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. come along, even today (let me pay) as much as our father wrote concerning us in the tablet, what he set down as owed by us. come along, let me pay even today what silver i was noted for that my father set down as owed by me, and let us go to the city in accordance with the tablet of the city. i shall not obstruct you." witnessed statement."
of the 6 talents 22 minas of copper that iddin-amurrum, son of šuhunum, owes to elamma, 1 talent 40 minas of copper are due from aššur-rē'ī, son of idida, who used it. the remainder of his copper, 4 talents 22 minas, iddin-amurrum still owes to me. from the week of nabi-suen, son of itūr-ilī, he will add an interest of 1.5! mina per talent per month. witnessed by dadani, by libbaya, by lā-qēp.
41 minas 11.5 shekels of refined silver, sealed by your representatives and by me - in three packages; further 0.6666 mina 1 shekel, its transport tariff - all this i entrusted to šu-nūnu and ili-ašrannī, and they have brought it to šalim-aššur, our father, in accordance with his orders. furthermore, i gave them 5 shekels of silver for their food. witnessed by ahu-waqar son of zurzur, by aššur-taklāku son of qardum-adad. furthermore, i gave 10 shekels of silver for a working-capital to šu-nūnu. 7 shekels of silver i gave as a working-capital to il-ašrannī witnessed by the same men.
from lamassī to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: you have written, saying: hire an attorney for me and get hold of a tablet from the city." we have hired an attorney for you and we got hold of a tablet from the city. just as when your father was still alive do not quarrel there so no evildoer may do harm to your father's house. as for the rest, it is you who must collect our father's silver as true gentlemen, and clear our father and our father's house of claims, and so no evildoer can do harm to our father's house you must not quarrel.urgent, if you are truly my brothers, the attorney has gone to you - act so that you make at least 10 minas of silver as true gentlemen, by clearing both the satisfaction? of our father's house and our father's house itself, and then clear yourselves, set out and come here so that you may clear matters with the customers and investors of your father. urgent, if you are delayed there for a single year, then send ... where our father owes 1 or 2 minas of silver, and then let us pay it. ... do not go out ..."
12 shekels of silver, the interest on 2 minas of silver, is owed by the man from tumliya.
3 minas 37 shekels of silver the share of kūn-ilum; 4.5 minas [x] shekels separately; x [minas of silver] the price of 9 -textiles and 2 dark textiles. 21 minas 42 shekels of silver the price of tin and textiles that became available, of the house of ilī-[... ... ... ...].
from buzu to emeni: ennu-... brought me 7 shekels of silver (for?) some 2 minas of copper. ... was not in excess. under your seal we shall despatch (it) out of this silver from (the last) three years. i have paid (it). the silver ... 0.5 mina 10 shekels of silver ...
to lamassutum and šalimma, thus says ummī-išhara: as for the letter you sent me, in which you wrote: 'why does he not send someone to me?' a messenger of his did arrive, but it was me who sent him away. i talked to him several times, but every time he bursts out, saying: 'several letters of mine went to her, but she refused to come here! could what i write her (now) really surpass the messages that already reached her several times?.'the gentleman has become very annoyed by the matter and said: 'because she refuses to come, you must not again speak to me!' if you are my sister, do not keep writing me things that are not true and certainly do not write him for silver. i talked to him because of the silver and he said: 'should i really oblige her mother or her brothers for no less than half a mina of silver for her expenses? are there no ten shekels of silver available from my outstanding claims? and if they are not let her ask ten shekels of silver for her expenses from her mother or her brothers, which i promise to pay back here if only she leaves for here'. do not keep writing me all kind of things and messages. you have brought me into conflict with the gentleman. he tells me: 'since, not being my maid, she refuses to come here, you must not mention her name to me again, lest you will no longer be my sister!' why are others ruling your children and your household, while you are staying there? please do not make your children perish and do not estrange me from the gentleman's house. if you see a possibility to come, get ready and leave for here, before the gentleman gets different ideas. the day pilah-ištar arrived here, since you had not accompanied him, he felt very unhappy and for five days did not leave his house. if you are seeking another husband, write me so, i wish to know it. if not, get ready to leave and come here. if you do not come, you will bring me into conflict with the gentleman and you will make your children perish and i, i will never again mention your name, you will no longer be my sister and you don't have to write me any more.""
from šu-bēlum to enna-suen and ali-ahum: zuba and adad-bāni, the smugglers, bring you 11 textiles, including those belonging to the servant, and two covers. give them their wages, 10 shekels of silver; also, send 10 shekels of silver ... and the servant must not be delayed - send him. buy shoes for 1 shekel of silver and some shoes for women and send them. urgent, as for the textiles, sell them as well as you can. my dear brothers, lulu keeps having textiles belonging to strangers brought in, so you must reach an agreement with him that his servant travels here with the servant, so he may send 20 or 30 textiles here.
i gave 1 abarnian textile, 1 burā'u-textile to kukuzi son of sahri-ilī from šalatuwar for purchases.
šalim-aššur seized us and said to šu-bēlum and enna-suen: i have paid some 1 or 2 talents of silver for your father's debt out of my joint-stock capital. come on, look at the tablets concerning your father's debt and pay me my silver." they said: "our father's tablets and copies were sealed with the seals of šu-illil, amur-ištar and šu-anum, and they are in the city. if indeed you can establish anything as owed by our father, will you refuse to take it complete in the city?" šalim-aššur answered šu-bēlum: "i have personally promised to collect the silver that is in anatolia. why have you taken silver from dada's son in hahhum?" šu-bēlum answered: "yes, i took it." so he asked enna-suen, saying: "why have you taken silver in timel-kiya?" he answered: "i shall look whether i took any, but there is nothing." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by akuza, by lalum, by šu-kūbum, by aššur-imittī, by itūr-ilī. "
4 of ordinary quality, 3textiles from nahria, 5 -textiles from zalpa, 3 minas of tin, 1 from kanesh - all this the merchant gave to šu-ištar. ... witnessed by kura, by aššur-šamšī. further, 2 undergarments, 4.5 -textiles belonging to anna-anna were given to šu-ištar for purchases.witnessed by these men.
10.6666 shekels aššur-mālik will take, 40.83333 shekels karwaya, 11 shekels iṣmid-ilum, 33.6666 shekels šu-kūbum, 15.3333 shekels buztāya
4 talents 58 minas (of tin) the declared value of šu-ištar('s shipment), 24 minas 10 shekels (of tin), including the fodder, i paid. 6.5 shekels (of tin) from the town of the kaneshites until timilkiya. 2 shekels of silver and 2 shekels of tin the hire of a donkey from timilkiya until hurama i paid. 4.5 shekels of silver and 4.5 shekels of tin the hire of a donkey and a donkey-driver from hurama until kanesh i paid. all this i paid for the sake of šu-ištar.
from šu-bēlum to ali-ahum: as i instructed you in kanesh when i said: go and (see to it that) my sister acquires an heir for me in the city" - so i wrote in my missive to you and nabi-suen together with my sister. my dear brother, if my sister has acquired an heir in the city, then let an exhaustive report come here with azu, the one who brings (this) letter, so i shall be happy. i shall pray for you to aššur and adad, the gods of our father."
dan-aššur detains enna-suen son of iddin-abum and he gave him to hanu son of itūr-ilī as guarantor. dan-aššur said: you will return the man. if you have not returned the man you will be responsible for 12 minas of silver and its interest in accordance with the certified tablet concerning his father's debt." enna-suen said: "for his debt to whom?" dan-aššur said: "he is indebted either to my father or anonymously. but if you have a quittance, then bring it and invalidate the tablet." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger.witnessed by nazi, by puzur-anna, by ah-šalim."
from enna-suen to ali-ahum: 1.3333 shekel 15 grains of gold dust, owed by dadaya; he is to pay in kanesh. witnessed by adad-bāni, by our own amur-ištar. have him pay the gold there to you and let it remain there until i come. if he contests it with you, then give him a harsh talking-to.
sealed by aššur-gimlī; to azu, ištahšu and niwala.
to of ennam-aššur ... seal of ...
3 shekels of silver for enah-ilī;
1.6666 shekel for the road-tax of the five of us, 0.3333 shekel for bread in tawiniya. i gave 2 minas of copper in the territory of tišmurna where they held (us) back. 5 / 12 shekel of silver for one sheep that we acquired for the -official i paid to ladiya; 1 mina of refined silver (and) 10 shekels of tin into the hands of her servant. for a value of 1 shekel of silver i gave them sundries. 1 shekel of silver for oil 0.3333 shekel fodder for the donkey.
1 mina 56.5 shekels of silver (with) aššur-nādā, son of ernu''id; 33.5 shekels of silver, working capital of aššur-imittī, son of hali-abum; 25 shekels of silver, working capital of galdaya; 1 mina of silver with galdaya, from month vii he will add (as interest) 1.5 shekel per month, eponymy of abiya son of šu-dagan; 50.6666 shekels of silver due from iddin-aššur of nahriya; he will add 1.5 shekel per mina (as interest); 55 shekels of silver with būr-suen; 48 minas of copper with habtuniš; 1 mina 15 shekels (with) šalim-aššur, son of uphāqum; 2 talents 13 minas of copper with ilī-bāni, son of ibni-ilī; 0.83333 mina of silver with aššur-bāni, son of sukkuku; 8.5 minas of silver with šuli, son of ellil-ilī, from month ii / iii he will add 1.5 shekel per mina, eponymy of šu-ištar. ; 1.3333 mina of silver with aššur-dūrī; 5 talents of copper with iddin-amurrum, son of šuhanum; 1 mina of silver with ilšu-rabi, son of bulāli; 1.3333 mina of silver with idnāya; 15 minas of copper with aššur-rabi; 1 talent of copper with šu-išhara; 0.5 mina of silver with hanānum; 30 minas of copper with puzur-abeh; 11 talents of copper the son of dazu'a- 17.3333 minas with aššur-nišû, adad?; in the presence of ali-ahum, son of zuku'a; 40 minas of copper the son of kabriya.
say to kukua, ennam-suen and uṣur-ša-aššur, thus šu-ištar: keep the maid there under conrol and let her not operate in uzinum and not affect the native anatolian. she wrote me here as follows: 'send (somebody) to collect the price due to me'. may dear colleagues, keep the maid there under control and cheat her by telling her: 'one will conduct you to your lord. collect your small goods and any silver you have and then you will go to your lord with the first caravan!' and as soon as she is gathering her belongings deprive her of her garment and her head-dress and sell her to somebody from talhat. do not sell her to an assyrian or to a citizen of kanesh. get rid of her and she shall never (again) be seen in the land of kanesh!""
from ikūn-pīya to ennam-aššur, lā-qēpum, iddin-abum and adad-pilah: ennam aššur has brought you 10 minas of refined silver. buy good tin for 2 minas of silver and seal that seperately. for the rest of the silver make a profitable purchase for me. to ennam-aššur: you owe 40 minas of good tin. my dear brother, send me the tin with the first transport as a favour to me. my dear brothers, take care that my servant is not delayed. susaya son of šukkutum owes me 0.3333 mina 3 shekels of refined silver; from the month ša-kēnātim he is to pay in 30 days; eponymy buzutaya. it draws interest from him. i hold the tablet with my witnesses from the gate of the god. make him pay the silver and its interest. if there is any silver and its interest then let him give it to you, even though he may raise objections to you. if he (pretends that he) has not become indebted to me, then open my tablets and send me the memoranda written in the name of erišum. place the tablet of ikūn-pī-ištar among my tablets and after that you four must seal. ask ennam-aššur about a tablet concerning 2.5 minas of silver where the creditor's name has been declared, and send it to me.
ennam-aššur owes 5 shekels of silver to luzi. he will bring one -textile worth 5 shekels of silver up here from the city within one year. if he has not brought a up here from the city in one year, he must pay 10 shekels of silver here. month tē'inātum, eponymy elāli, the high priest. witnessed by atata, by lā-qēp.
207 minas of šikku-copper that itūr-ili and elāli sons of puzur-anna owe to šalim-aššur — on behalf of šalim-aššur his son ennam-aššur has received the copper. any tablet concerning 207 minas of copper which may turn up is invalid. witnessed by šu-bēlum son of šu-ištar, by aššur-rēṣī son of šar-suen, by zukuwa son of aššur-idī.
to šalim-aššur from ennam-aššur: your representatives entered your house, opened for your tablets and took out the tablet concerning the debt of uṣur-ša-aššur and aššur-ṭāb and we entrusted it to abuwa. now, (listen to) its copy: puzur-ti'amtum, aššur-imittī son of ataya and uṣur-ša-aššur ...abuwa ... i keep writing aššur-ṭāb son of sadaya ... but he will not come. for how long ... and he was not afraid to speak before your representatives. why should i write at length to you, that we are unhappy and have no one to care for us? my dear father, send a final report to your representatives and to me. i shall do what you order, and i shall clear myself and come so i can clear it with you. 4 minas 3 shekels ... lapis lazuli ... of ennānum and ... the transport tariff for the silver ..."
to aššur-nimrī, ali-ahum, šamaš-bāni and nūr-ištar from puzur-anna; specifically to šamaš-bāni: in addition to (what was in) your memo - they added 6 shekels of silver for you from after you left; 13 minas of tin under your seal and the seal of puzur-aššur that you left me. witnessed by taqin-abum, by enna-suen, by iddin-aššur son of kuzilānum. i checked your ... for puzur-aššur son of iliya, and i personally paid his 13.6666 minas at 6.83333 minas each for you. in all, 19.5 minas of tin were paid. the 10 mina weighing stone by which he weighed was 0.3333 mina too large. he is ready to open the packages of my investors ... until he has made me pay the -tin, my dear brother, pay 7 shekels of silver per (mina) for my tin to my representatives. may it be a favour for me since i have done you a favour and i have arranged a caravan for you.
from kukuwa and šu-ištar to ennam-aššur: in accordance with your instuctions your representative... gave 1 mina of checked silver and ⅚ mina of refined silver to ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya against interest. here kukuwa paid 2 minas 4 shekels of silver and entrusted it to šu-ištar under his seal. we shall go to kanesh and he will see the tablet with his seal, they will pay the silver and its interest to the representatives of the merchant, and we shall release their tablet. the silver will then travel overland in their name. he further paid ⅚ mina 3 shekels of silver from his valid tablet, and entrusted it under his seal to šu-ištar. he said: i am waiting for my surety, so let him go to kanesh to your representatives, so they may release his surety and his tablet. ababa, šalim-wardī, and šēp-ištar lead 15 talents of wool, 7 black donkeys and 7 to you. have šalim-wardī credit your goods to you there. the winter has become bad and until today they are delayed. to ennam-aššur from šu-ištar: send your instructions to kanesh and with respect to my copper - where it may be reached... is not in kanesh.
10 shekels of silver i gave to iddin-suen, son of ennānum.
to puzur-aššur from ani-ani: ṭāb-ṣill-aššur gave me x mina 13 shekels of sickels. of that we gave 0.5 mina 0.6666 shekels to akiya. of the silver you sent i took 1 1 / 4 shekels. ṭāb-ṣill-aššur brings you 2 3 / 4 shekels of silver. if you are indeed my lord, send me small goods with the first transport.
... ašu-uman and kikaršan lead all this to you. they carry a weight-stone of 10 minas ... under my seal. if i have not reached it, they shall check the safe wool for you. ... they should count ...
15 minas of washed copper is owed by aššur-kāšid son of ikraya.
to my representatives, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum from šalim-aššur: i am staying in tegarama. before i take away my goods - urgent! - before i arrive, collect every mina of silver and let it be in my house. do not send any silver to the city. on the day you hear my letter ali-ahum should come to meet me either in hurama or in kuššara, and he should bring every mina of silver that is at my disposal. the textiles that ali-ahum transported from the smuggling must remain under seal.
itūr-ilī deposited ⅚ mina 3 ½ shekels of lapis lazuli worth 2 ⅔ minas ½ shekel with the sons of šakri-uman. of the 2 minas 15 shekels of lapis lazuli that he sent with šu-ištar, thereof he sent 1 ½ mina 2 shekels of silver, the price of ½ mina 7 ½ shekels of lapis. the sealed silver i placed under aššur's authority. the rest of the lapis lazuli remains in šu-ištar's possession. we made an accounting for all the silver, and after i have paid in full the silver that i owe ... the sealed silver ... 9 ⅔ shekels of lapis lazuli, an extra, is in ennam-aššur's possession.
i gave 2 shekels of silver for the sacrifices of aššur-malik son of ali-ahum;
of the 8 minas of refined silver that elalī, son of ištar-pilah, in hahhum had given as trust to ennam-aššur, and (for which) in his tablet was written (belongs to) the tamkārum", (and) on which tablet aššur-lamassī, aššur-damiq and aššur-bēl-awātim are present (as witnesses) - 2 minas 15 shekels of that silver ēnah-ilī has collected in the name of elamma and given to lamassutum. month iv, eponymy of aššur-imittī. if for these 2 minas 15 shekels of silver and the interest on it ennam-aššur, son of šu-bēlum, the investors of ištar-pilah or the sons of ištar-pilah, raise a claim against ēnah-ilī, lamassutum, elamma's wife, ennam-aššur (and) pilah-ištar, elamma's sons, (and) aššur-imittī, son of aššur-ṭāb, will clear him."
within three months aššur-mālik shall bring the tablet of his witnesses and the tablet of the trading-station and discuss with šu-bēlum. if within three months aššur-mālik does not bring the tablet of his witnesses and the one of the trading-station, aššur-mālik will pay 0.5 mina of silver to šu-bēlum. reckoned from the week-eponymy of buzutaya and aššur-imittī, month x, eponymy-year of adad-bāni. tūraya, ennam-suen and muti-aššur, these men acted as judges.
inita wrote me and i sold 1 textile for 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver to walhašna's son.
to ali-ahum from ikūn-pīya and zukuwa: they brought your tin, 1 talent 30 minas. we checked it and 0.5 mina was missing. they took 0.5 mina tin in wahšušana. it was sold at the rate 7.6666 shekels 7.5 grains; in silver: 11.3333 minas 2.5 shekels. of that we gave 10 shekels of silver for the 'water-man'. šu-hubur brings 11 minas 12.5 shekels of silver under our seals to you. hanu brought 24 pirikannus and he led them out into the villages. hanu will bring you the proceeds from them. we made šukkutum pay 4 minas of silver out of what was in his tablet; šu-hubur brings it to you under his seal. it passes overland in the name of šukkutum as well. we shall make šukkutum pay the rest of your silver owed by him and send it to you with the proceeds from your pirikannus. to ali-ahum from zukuwa: why is it that i have written five times but you do not inform me? my dear brother, inform me! send me word whether the silver owed by iddin-aššur has been paid or not.
say to elamma, thus ahu-waqar: you wrote me as follows: '(there is) a tablet wrapped in a rag, on the face of which is written: 'seal of ali-ahum to hinnāya and elamma'. we looked for it among the tablets of aššur-ṭāb, but it is not there. we have now sent a letter to aššur-ṭāb. when his message (telling) where it has been placed comes back we will send it to you. as for the slave-girl of aššur-taklāku, about whom you wrote us, we asked dān-aššur and he said: 'it was me who paid the price of the slave-girl out of my own means.' šarrum-adad will go to wahšušana, he will interrogate the witnesses and then we will send you definite information.""
i brought 10 minas of refined silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, for my debt to my father's house. further, i entrusted 1 mina of refined silver belonging to ali-ahum from his caravan, under my seal to aššur-dan son of zu'u, the lieutenant.witnessed by amurrum-bāni son of manana, by amur-šamaš son of mišu-rabi, by ṣilulu son of uku.
... the colony rendered a verdict, and šalim-aššur and amur-ištar's son ...
ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur seized us against agiya son of ikūnum, and ennam-aššur said as follows to agiya: ... certified tablets of your father's in kanesh ... for you and copper and ... i am an heir. ... i sue ... these men ... reckoned from the month ..., eponymy after aššur-malik, within 1 year ...certified tablets ... you and ... do not raise claim and do not complain at all." agiya answered: "show me, either you yourself or your agent or your brother, the tablets concerning my father's debt in kanesh, and if i have not produced for you the tablet sealed by your father or the relevant witnesses within my stipulated term, then it is indeed our debt in accordance with my tablet sealed by our fathers, and i shall not raise claim and i shall not complain." witnessed by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of alili, by bēlum-bāni son of kasiya, by aššur-malik ... 14 shekels of lapis lazuli ... votive offerings ... 10 shekels of ... of good quality owed by bēlum-bāni son of kasiya.witnessed by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur son of alili."
[... puzur-aššur(?), son of] ahu-waqar [ ...] brought here. thereof 4 tex[tiles...] were deducted. the rest of the textiles [...] and the black donkeys ... [ ... x silver] the -tax and the food of the donkeys, [] they paid 5 minas and 7.5 shekels of silver [...] and the 3 black donkeys and 170 [minas of of] kanesh, according to the anatolian weight standard, which aššur-[...] lead to you (pl.), 1 textile thereof was for his own clothing. after the expenses of abiaya and aššur-taklāku and the silver of ... 3 minas and 6 shekels of silver became freely available for him. six [minas] of silver which were cleared kuliya took. for [this affair] the of šalatuwar made us appear in court and we gave <our testimony> in the presence of aššur-š[u(?)...] and ennam-aššur, son of ikuppi-aššur, (and) of [...]; aninaya, son of watrum was our colleague. ten textiles [...], of our father he brought to kanesh. for [...], 5.5 minas of tin, which proved to be in [...] and which he took, 1 mina of tin [...] your also took, 12 shekels of tind he weighed it out in his very presence. in all 8.6666 minas [and x shekels of tin] from his sales he [charged] to puzur-aššur and [...] in the presence of ennam-suen, son of aššur-mālik, (and of) aš[šur-...]. one mina of silver under aššur-mālik's seals, 3 [...] [x] minas of silver, a textile of akiaya and azutaya, silver belonging to ennam-aššur, i entrusted to aninaya. 0.83333 mina and 3 shekels of silver under the seals of ikuppiya, son of akusānum (and) separately 17.5 shekels of silver under the seals of akitaya, i brought along and entrusted to aššur-nišū, son of izkānum in the presence of iddin-suen, son of kukulānum, of ahiaya, son of laqēp, of hubītum, (and) of akiaya, son of akusānum. these witnesses i set against them in nehriya when i entrusted to them the packets (of silver). four shekels of silver under the seals of akitaya i entrusted to aninaya, in the presence of these same persons, in the presence of aninaya, son of watrum, of aššur-nišû, son of izkānum, of aki<a>ya, son of akusānum - the witnesses which i had set against iddin-aššur, son of šu-bēlum. month xii, eponymy of ṭāb-aššur. 1.5 shekel of silver is due from aššur-ennam. 10 shekels of silver, the working capital of puzur-aššur, my harnessor, the native held and when i myself took the silver i gave him a tablet with my seal and 1.5 shekel [of silver] thereof remains as his debt and i gave [his tablet] in deposit to the son of ga[...] until he gives me the silver. in the presence of ahiaya, of ali-ahum, son of iddi[n-...], (and) of šu-nunu, son of adadaya, in nehriya. i said: the silver belongs to puzur-[aššur], we [o] to bring it to the city for making purchases." [...] shekels of silver for a textile(?), the silver he / i ..., either from mamma or from [...] i will put under seal and send! to you (fem). [...] gold of extremely good quality (and) 14 shekels of silver... [...] i have as a claim on ... [unfortunately], aššur-lamassī, son of aššur-mālik, your witness, has died. kuliya will take [an oath from ašsur-ennam, [...] (and) ilī-bāni and my silver, then aššur-ennam [... and] aššur-ennam will pay me the silver or what has been purchased with it. in the presence of [ agaya, son of ahuni, [of..., of ... maya, son of l / zu..., of aššur-mālik, son of kurara, ..."
from ayarti to enna-suen: pay attention to the gold in your possession so that you and elāli send me good gold. the man should not say: do not send any gold!" - but do take care to send me good gold. do not wait until you leave (yourself). do me a great favour!"
from parrurtum to iddin-abum: your father's sister is dead. our brothers say: there is no heir. let us take away the house." set out and come here when you have heard the letter. they have turned your father's house into an extinguished fireplace."
tablet concerning x shekels ... the debt of ...
1 kutānu-textile for 10 shekel of silver to šumma-libbi-aššur;
37 -textiles, including (those) as free loan, belonging to šu-ištar, 2 textiles import-tax, 3 shekels of silver (balanced), 3 textiles for pre-emption. the rest of his textiles: 32 textiles. his share in the losses amounted to 3 shekels of silver.
seal of the kanesh colony: the colony has passed a verdict stating that šalim-aššur shall mention to iddin-abum's sons his tablets and what silver he has paid to cover iddin-abum's debt - all the silver, saying: this silver i paid in different places." "
seal of ištar-bāni, son of asqudum,
to ikūn-pīya, dan-aššur, šalim-wardī, and šu-nūnu from ennam-aššur: you wrote me and said: šu-nūnu brings you 3 talents of washed copper from the proceeds of your tin and textiles." i checked it here and found 2.6666 minas, plus 2 talents of copper owed by dan-aššur which you sent. šu-nūnu brings you his certified tablet concerning his debt. my dear brothers, take care there to have šalim-wardī and šu-nūnu credit you with the proceeds from my previous shipment of textiles and tin. then seal the copper with your own seals, and send it to me as soon as possible. also, send me ewarimuša. ... my dear lords do me a favour, and take care, for i too am a man of favours. 25 -textiles, x minas of tin, 15 shekels of silver ... šu-nūnu and ewarimuša ... will lead to you. urgent, keep an eye on my servants. to šalim-wardī: even here i gave you instructions, saying: "let the donkeys from your transport remain." why is it that you have sold them? and why is it that you sent šu-nūnu here? there, as many of my textiles as you take, both of you must seal what you receive with your own seals."
5 saddlecloths of 4 donkeys, pouches, 4 packing-racks, 3 packsaddles - all this is with puzur-adad. pouches, 1 packing-rack, 2 ropes with pegs, 1 packsaddle, 1 skin container with oil and 1 dagger - all this is with huhu ... ... pouches, 1 packing-rack, 1 saddlecloth, with puzur-anna
to ali-ahum from zukuwa: iddin-aššur owes me 12 minas of silver; i left the certified tablet with you. after his loan came due his terms have become overdue for me by 22 weeks. send me word to wahšušana as to whether the silver and its interest - votive offerings for aššur - has been paid or not. if the silver and its interest has been paid, inform me about how much silver has been paid. as to the tablets concerning anatolians that i left as well, take care to have the silver paid. with respect to puzur-aššur, my instructions will go to him. what copper i shall make i shall bring into purušhaddum with me. if puzur-aššur has written anything to you, send me his answer to inform me. also, if he has written to you about donkeys, send him donkeys and ...! my dear brother, pay attention to my instructions. do not ever send the tablet.
from atata, šu-anum, dannaya and lamassī to ali-ahum: in accordance with your instructions we got a tablet of the city for you; also, we hired an attorney for you. following the verdict of the city they must release the tablet that was entrusted to iliya son of elāli to the attorney, and the silver from the tablet the attorney ... he who pays must assist the attorney. as one brother has made the other hear, there pay the silver that ... to the attorney, and assist the attorney and have paid the silver that is in your brother's possession, then seal it and give it to the attorney so he can bring it. come here yourselves and discuss about the testament concerning you. ababa is our attorney. his wages were 0.6666 mina 8 shekels of silver. damiq-pī-aššur gave him 0.3333 mina 8 shekels of silver. give him 0.3333 mina of silver there. travel expenses and ... - give him 8 shekels of silver. concerning the lapis lazuli that your father gave to man-mahir, lead your witnesses there, enna-suen son of uš..., ...-aššur and their partner down to the gate of the god, certify their tablets with your testimony and seize man-mahir for the copper and the lapis lazuli, and make him pay the price of the lapis lazuli and the copper.
seal of adad-pilah, son of anīnum, seal of aššur-lamassī, son of lā-qēp, seal of nazi, son of puzur-banini. 3 minas of refined silver aššur-lamassī, son of lā-qēp, owes to elamma. he will pay within 24 months from the week of elamma and zuba. if he does not pay when his term is up, he will add as interest 1.5 shekel per mina per month. month i, eponymy of the successor of šu-hubur. 8 minas of refined silver šuli, son of puzur-abeh, owes to elamma. he will add as interest 1.5 shekel per mina per month. eponymy of the successor of baziya, son of šēp-ālim. seal of ilī-bāni, son of ibni-ilī, seal of aššur-mālik, son of puzur-aššur, seal of iddin-aššur, son of puzur-abeh!. 4 talents 32 minas of copper from haburata iddin-aššur, son of puzur-abeh, owes to elamma. he will pay within 14 weeks from the week of aššur-rēṣī. if he does not pay he will add interest in conformity with the rule of the colony. seal of šu-ištar, son of ennam-aššur, seal of ikūn-mīšar, son of ilī-dān, that ikūn-mīšar, son of ilī-dān, owes 8 shekels of refined silver to elamma. he will pay when he returns from the city. seal of ididi, seal of dudurum, seal of aššur-nādā, seal of aššur-dūrī. 2 minas 10 shekels of refined silver aššur-dūrī owes to elamma. he will pay within 8 weeks from the week of ānah-ilī. if he does not pay he will add interest per mina in conformity with the rule of the colony. (another tablet) apart from this tablet that turns up is invalid. seal of zuba, son of aššur-rē'ī, seal of šu-ištar, son of sūaya, seal of balṭu-šar, son of sukuhum. 0.5 mina of refined silver balṭu-šar owes to elamma. he will pay within 6 months from the week of sukkallum and kura. if he does not pay he will add an interest of 1.5 shekel per mina per month. seal of iddin-suen, son of itūr-ilī, seal of nāb-suen, son of abī-ilī, seal of idnāya, son of kutaya. 12 shekels of refined silver iddin-suen, son of itūr-ilī, owes to aššur-ṭāb. from the week of pūšu-kēn and ennum-bēlum, month iv, eponymy of aššur-idī. seal of aššur-šamšī, son of ilī-tūram, that ištar-ilšu, son of azuzaya, owes 45 shekels of refined silver to aššur-ṭāb. <from> the eponymy of ali-ahum he will add 1.5 shekel per (mina, per month) as interest.
say to aššur-rēṣī, ennam-aššur, dadiya and ataya, thus elamma: youplur said: '17 minas of copper from the price for a house-plot of nūr-ilī is still due from aššur-rēṣī. 8 minas of copper belonging to ilī-bāni, son of ibni-ilī, is due from ataya'. settle accounts for all the copper they still owe and collect it and add it to that derived from the gold. moreover, if you have collected anything of my outstanding claims, buy for itiles and send them to me. say to ataya: "the tablet with the letter of aššur-lamassī concerning the free loan he entrusted to your father, which they are bringing to you, read that tablet over there, but do not get angry. please, my brother, assist my representative(s) and send me, when a shipment of mine starts its journey, each time one or two textiles, then i will do you a favor (in return).""
seal of la-qēpum, son of izzizam-ilī. for these words the kanesh colony made me available and before aššur's dagger [i gave my testimony].
aššuriš-tikal and iddin-abum owe 16 minas of refined silver to issu-arik. witnessed by akuza, witnessed by ibni-suen.
to šalim-aššur from ennam-aššur: you have written, saying: the silver that you have brought out from burušhaddum should be deposited under the seals of my representatives." the silver is available under the seals of your representatives. as to your outstanding loans, that you wrote about, here your representatives made you lay claim to the 10.5 talents of -copper, also 40 minas of (copper) from haburat, 8 black donkeys and 2 servants, i.e. the yield in silver that salliya and ilī-dan owed, and they have entrusted the goods to sahri-ilī and ennam-aššur son of šu-bēlum. if salliya has not placed the goods before you, salliya must give purchases in the city of assur to šalim-aššur. here i seized ilī-dan and made him pay 2 minas of silver. we received 2 minas of silver of my fees. 2 minas 15 shekels of silver with your fees from the man of tumliya... here i keep a close watch over your outstanding loans. also, suen-nādā is staying in wahšušana; when he enters here i shall make him pay the silver and its interest. as much silver as the customers owe and for which their terms are up - take care to make them pay the silver and then deposit it under the seals of [your] representatives. with respect to your instructions .... i keep a close watch over your outstanding loans. do not be nervous. "
šalim-aššur's attorney questioned ennam-aššur and ali-ahum, šalim-aššur's sons: come on, show me where the assets, your father's silver is in accordance with the tablet of the city, then i shall release it to you. do not obstruct me, me, the attorney! keep in mind what was sworn by the city and the king! since they kept petitioning me i said: 'come on, take me (to court), then i shall release the assets, your father's silver to you.' but they refused to come, or to show me. i shall go to the city. you have obstructed me." this is not a formal lawsuit, only a witnessed questioning. ennam-aššur answered: "i submit to the tablet of the city and the attorney of my lord. i did not send you to court. you did indeed come to collect our father's assets, and once or twice you have questioned me, and i have not rejected you. i said: 'come on, let us go to durhumit where our father's assets are, and let us collect it.'" the attorney answered: "where are the proceeds from the lapis lazuli?" ennam-aššur answered: "have you been sent after the lapis lazuli?" the attorney said: "there, remember that he said: 'have you been sent for the lapis lazuli?'" "and have i confirmed or denied the proceeds of the lapis lazuli for you?" the attorney said: "bring it so we can seal the lapis." ennam-aššur answered: "i shall personally bring it to the city. question my brother ali-ahum about 28 u-textiles and let him either confirm or deny that to you." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ennam-aššur son of ahiya, by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, son of aššur-bāni; ali-ahum son of šu-kūbum was our absent partner."
[... puzur-aššur(?), son of] ahu-waqar [ ...] brought here. thereof 4 tex[tiles...] were deducted. the rest of the textiles [...] and the black donkeys ... [ ... x silver] the -tax and the food of the donkeys, [] they paid 5 minas and 7.5 shekels of silver [...] and the 3 black donkeys and 170 [minas of of] kanesh, according to the anatolian weight standard, which aššur-[...] lead to you (pl.), 1 textile thereof was for his own clothing. after the expenses of abiaya and aššur-taklāku and the silver of ... 3 minas and 6 shekels of silver became freely available for him. six [minas] of silver which were cleared kuliya took. for [this affair] the of šalatuwar made us appear in court and we gave <our testimony> in the presence of aššur-š[u(?)...] and ennam-aššur, son of ikuppi-aššur, (and) of [...]; aninaya, son of watrum was our colleague. ten textiles [...], of our father he brought to kanesh. for [...], 5.5 minas of tin, which proved to be in [...] and which he took, 1 mina of tin [...] your also took, 12 shekels of tind he weighed it out in his very presence. in all 8.6666 minas [and x shekels of tin] from his sales he [charged] to puzur-aššur and [...] in the presence of ennam-suen, son of aššur-mālik, (and of) aš[šur-...]. one mina of silver under aššur-mālik's seals, 3 [...] [x] minas of silver, a textile of akiaya and azutaya, silver belonging to ennam-aššur, i entrusted to aninaya. 0.83333 mina and 3 shekels of silver under the seals of ikuppiya, son of akusānum (and) separately 17.5 shekels of silver under the seals of akitaya, i brought along and entrusted to aššur-nišū, son of izkānum in the presence of iddin-suen, son of kukulānum, of ahiaya, son of laqēp, of hubītum, (and) of akiaya, son of akusānum. these witnesses i set against them in nehriya when i entrusted to them the packets (of silver). four shekels of silver under the seals of akitaya i entrusted to aninaya, in the presence of these same persons, in the presence of aninaya, son of watrum, of aššur-nišû, son of izkānum, of aki<a>ya, son of akusānum - the witnesses which i had set against iddin-aššur, son of šu-bēlum. month xii, eponymy of ṭāb-aššur. 1.5 shekel of silver is due from aššur-ennam. 10 shekels of silver, the working capital of puzur-aššur, my harnessor, the native held and when i myself took the silver i gave him a tablet with my seal and 1.5 shekel [of silver] thereof remains as his debt and i gave [his tablet] in deposit to the son of ga[...] until he gives me the silver. in the presence of ahiaya, of ali-ahum, son of iddi[n-...], (and) of šu-nunu, son of adadaya, in nehriya. i said: the silver belongs to puzur-[aššur], we [o] to bring it to the city for making purchases." [...] shekels of silver for a textile(?), the silver he / i ..., either from mamma or from [...] i will put under seal and send! to you (fem). [...] gold of extremely good quality (and) 14 shekels of silver... [...] i have as a claim on ... [unfortunately], aššur-lamassī, son of aššur-mālik, your witness, has died. kuliya will take [an oath from ašsur-ennam, [...] (and) ilī-bāni and my silver, then aššur-ennam [... and] aššur-ennam will pay me the silver or what has been purchased with it. in the presence of [ agaya, son of ahuni, [of..., of ... maya, son of l / zu..., of aššur-mālik, son of kurara, ..."
when we counted the textiles shipped under my responsibility the palace took 2 -textiles; 1 šulupkaean-textile and 2 -textiles were lost. five textiles they took for their clothing. 117 dark textiles entered the palace, two of which are the share of kurub-ištar.
from bēliya to ennam-aššur and lā-qēp; specifically to lā-qēp: as to the 8 minas of refined silver - its import duty added, its transport tariff paid - silver belonging to a merchant, that i gave you for purchases with ṭāb-ahi and lā-qēp son of puzur-šadūʾe as witnesses - the merchant is ennam-aššur. any goods you have bought for him you must give to ennam-aššur son of šalim-aššur, and let him leave me a message from you (plural).
from iddin-aššur to ali-ahum, hanunu, ennanātum and kibal: if you have had ennam-adad's tin paid, then convert it to silver, give the silver to kibal and let him act in accordance with my instructions. also, send me word about how much silver you have given him. you have to seal for my tablets and the store-room. give ennanātum instructions that no one must open for my tablets without your permission. no one must deceive.
1 mina 6 shekels of refined (silver): the son of erra-idī;
from aššur-malik and amur-ištar to ali-ahum: of the 20 textiles that amur-ištar left kuziziya sold 5 textiles for 5 talents 50 minas of šikku-copper. amur-ištar sold 2 textiles for 1 talent 10 minas of washed copper. of the 5 talents 50 minas of copper from kuziziya we received 2 talents 35 minas of copper. of that šu-hubur son of puzur-ištar brings you 1 mina of silver under our seals. 2.3333 minas of silver ... ... of the 4 textiles belonging to abī-anum, kuziziya sold 1 textile for 1 talent of šikku-copper. 3 textiles remain. 2 textiles have been denied. he said: "šēp-ištar and aluwa have converted the rest of the lapis lazuli." the silver is left with kuziziya. ... belonging to amur-ištar ... of the textiles ... 2 servants ...
sealed by ennānum son of ali-abum, by aššur-nādā son of irnuid, by katātum son of malaba, by nūr-suen son of nirah-muttabbil, by iddin-suen son of ibaya. concerning šalim-ašsur and iddin-suen son of ibaya. they swore by the city concerning the words of this tablet, and no one must raise claim against the other.
from šalim-aššur to my representatives, ennam-aššur and ali-ahum: the tin i sent to you i bought the same way a colleague and friend bought, at 2 shekels under the rate. later, there was no tin. after you give it to ennam-bēlum you will also give it for a pledge according to my instructions. now, as to the rest of my tin, if the rate is not 1:7 or 1:8, then do not sell the tin for refined silver. i hear that there is a market for in kanesh. inquire, and if you cannot realise any silver in kanesh, you must not release the to credit agents in kanesh itself. you will bring the up to either hattum or burušhaddum ... give instructions to ...-aššur ... amkuwa and ... turn to ... and ... on the narrow track and either to durhumit or to tišmurna wherever ... that i have promised to you ... until i come my smuggling goods, fine ... the proceeds from the akkadian textiles. until i come ...
... 20 minas of refined silver. reckoned from the week of the he must pay within 13 weeks ...
seal of peruwa, seal of šahišnuman, seal of barimea. 15 shekels of silver
seal of labān-nādā, son of iddin-suen, seal of nabi-suen, son of šu-bēlum. seal of iddin-ištar, son of iddin-abum seal of puzur-ištar, son of dān-aššur. for these words the durhumit colony made us available and before aššur's dagger we gave our testimony. a record concerning kukra of the son of zuzānum.
witnessed by kura son of iddin-aššur, by ennam-ilī, by idiya son of ikūnum.
to ali-ahum from hanu: here your agent and i seized šu-illil. we set a term of 20 days for him to pay the silver. his term is up, but he has gone to the land harabiš. he said: do not bother me for 10 days. when i return i shall pay you the silver." here we searched for the tablet concerning the debt of šu-illil, ilī-dan's packer, but the tablet is not here. ask amur-šarrassa there where the tablet is. send word as soon as possible. "
10 shekels of silver for his sacrifices, to ikūn-pīya; i gave 2 shekels to his son; 5 shekels to aššur-nādā. 2 shekels to atata son of amur-ištar; 1 shekel to his son. 2 shekels to šu-laban. 3 shekels to enna-suen. 2 ½ shekels to aššur-nīšu. 1 shekel to šu-anum son of šu-ištar. 1 ½ shekel to ali-abum son of mannuwa. 1 ½ shekel to puzur-aššur son of šu-laban. 2 shekels to amur-ilī. 1 ½ shekel to ladiya. 2 minas of good copper to sahar-ilī. 1 shekel to puzur-aššur son of šu-bēlum. 2 shekels to ali-ahum, your brother. 1 shekel to ladiya as well. 1 shekel to ennam-aššur son of šu-aššur. 10 shekels of silver to pūšu-kēn; 1 ½ shekel to his son. 1 ½ shekel to ennam-aššur son of sukalliya. 2 shekels to ilī-bāni son of puzur-aššur. 2 shekels to lā-qēp, iddin-suen's packer. 15 shekels of silver when i gave his -garments(?) to pūšu-kēn. 2 shekels to innaya. 2 shekels to imdī-ilum when i gave them their -garments(?). 3 shekels to anninum. 3 shekels to amur-ilī.
from aššur-bāni to ali-ahum and lulu: 0.5 mina of silver under my seal that ... has brought you, my dear brothers, pay attention and ...
from man-mahir to ennam-aššur and lulu; specifically to lulu: x minas of silver that i sent to you with kulma-kulma, pay that silver to ennam-aššur. then let him give you a tablet with his seal to the effect that i shall not raise claim against kulma-kulma. seal the silver and let it remain with ennam-aššur. there is a complaint against the city. to ennam-aššur: have lulu give you 2 black donkeys and their harness; also, have arši-ah give you 1 donkey. ask enna-suen and if he has received silver for expenses demand it from him and load them (the donkeys). if he is not there (sell) the donkeys for 0.5 mina each.
thus say amur-ištar to kuliya, aššur-ennam, šalim-aššur, and amurrum-bāni: here i entrusted 2(?) textiles of extremely good quality to šalim-aššur; the textiles are encumbered. for these textiles amurrum-bāni ... together with šalim-aššur and the tithe of the office and the [... tax] due to the palace ... he will charge me. ... [... x] mina(s) and 3 shekels of silver are due by ... [s] make him pay. [... x+]0.5 mina of silver [due by ...]-ennam, which aššur-ennam [... x+]0.5 mina of silver [...] due by asānum [ il]iš-tikal, the price of tin. [x] silver and 2 textiles due by [...], son of amura. 0.3333 mina [due by ...]iš, son of šu-hubur. [x] -gold due by [..., son of ] ennam-aššur, which ... you ... i should write [to you] ... you know where ... is available. and the textiles, [sell them one] or two apiece, and with mouth [and] heart that which ... let them bring to me and open my eyes! dear brothers, do your best that together with the price of my textiles also at least 1 mina of silver reaches me here and so give me courage. one mina 10 shekels of silver ... our ...
since the attorney is delayed(?) and as yet has not come up to kanesh, when he comes up we shall hear the verdict of the city and your missives, and we shall ...
buzutaya has received 14 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-imittī son of dudiki, by išme-ilum, by aššur-bāni, by enna-suen, by aššur-emūqi, by ah-šalim his son.
seal of šu-ištar son of šuaya. the kanesh colony gave me for these proceedings and i gave my testimony before aššur's dagger. ilī-bāni son of uzuwa was my absent partner.
please my fathers, my lords, you know very well that ... (therefore) we did not ? ... . [?] reach ... we keep flaring up in anger. if you so wish, provide all the help you can and we will make the man of kukrin, the ruler, swear the oath so that we can control him. also, what concerns ..., it is him who can achieve it. the caravan? of hanna-nārum has traveled on from buruddum and from buruddum he wrote me as follows: 'the palace because of the -tax is maltreating me, proceed. ... they have placed ... with wood ... a traveler ... us.""
man-mahir son of amur-ištar owes 30 talents of -copper from durhumit to šalim-aššur. when he arrives one month will pass, and then he will send silver to his representatives, and ... he will pay in copper. if he has not sent it (in time), he will pay interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. witnessed by enna-suen, by salliya by aššur-nādā, by damiq-pī-aššur.
to amur-aššur and ali-ahum from aššur-nimrī: you may have heard that trade in tin and textiles is ruined in purušhaddum. the smith kukuwa, his brother tumana and mala..., also a smith, ... and two ... the men ... to them they should ... and for each some 10 minas of silver ... tin at the rate ... to refine the silver. in 5 or 6 months ...
14 half-packs and 2 top-packs sealed by šēp-ištar and šalim-wardī šēp-ištar and šalim-wardīentrusted to the wife of ištar-pilah. witnessed by iddin-aššur son of kuzilānum, by ṭāb-ahe, son of irbi-adad, ...-muttabbil, by puzur-šaduʾe brother of ali-ahum.
thus the 'datu-payers,' kuliya, the messenger of kanesh, and durhumit, say to every single and (all) the until kanesh: asānum, our messenger, has been sent to kanesh to deliver information. as soon as you have heard our letter, each of you must give an escort to asānum and each must escort him to the next, all the way until kanesh. he must not suffer a delay of even one single day!""
to ali-ahum from hanu: in accordance with your instructions šu-hubur and i stood up and seized alulaya and said: pay the silver and its interest." alulaya answered: "i sent him the silver a month ago with būr-suen." with respect to the memorandum that you instructed me about i questioned alulaya, and he answered: "lā-qēpum son of šu-aššur has it." i also questioned ahu-waqar son of zurzur, and he answered: "ilī-bāni son of baši-ilī has the memorandum." i seized azu and he answered: "i shall take enough, either in silver or from your at 5 shekels per piece." he said further: "at your departure i shall seal the silver and its interest"; and i seized šukkutum about the -textile and he answered: "the is available." it still is, and you cautioned me there, my dear lord, saying: "i have released them to you on terms." today you keep hearing that trade is at a standstill. i shall sell my goods, set out and come."
representing the sons of šalim-aššur i hand you over to guarantors. we are inheritors. we have in our possession a tablet stating that you three owe silver and that you are jointly liable. if you have either oral witnesses against šalim-aššur or if you have one against our fathers, or if you have witnesses - then produce the evidence to these two (witnesses), and what can we then say? we are inheritors. do not drag us to court." witnessed statement."
of the 2 mi[nas of silver] that are the debt of pu[zur-ellil]?, recorded in his certified tablet, and of the 0.5 mina of silver i had given him separately, thereof i obtained 2 talents 34.5 minas of copper. of the 1 talent 50 minas of copper and 10 shekels of silver that are the debt of puzur-ellil, thereof i seized 1 mina of silver from šalim-aššur, son of uphāqum.
of the 4 minas of silver that the smiths paid to me, 0.83333 mina 3.3333 shekels of silver of inferior quality together with 3.3333 shekels underweight remain as owed by them.
2 minas of silver from the proceeds on your tin which i received in timelkiya.
ababa, the attorney of šalim-aššur's firm, ennam-aššur and ṣilliya, ali-ahum's representative, seized us against iddin-aššur and the attorney ababa said to iddin-aššur: you have heard the tablet from the city. i collect šalim-aššur's silver; also, i brought you a missive from šalim-aššur's investors from the month, eponymy of aššur-malik son of ali-ahum, stating that you must release 40 talents of good copper that they entrusted to you, and you must not raise claim against šalim-aššur's sons. i have received the 40 talents of good copper about which you reached an agreement with šalim-aššur's investors, in accordance with their missive dated mont, eponymy aššur-malik son of ali-ahum. do not obstruct me. indeed, may these men know - listen to the missive from the investors before these witnesses, and do not raise claim against šalim-aššur's sons. ... as much as those who settled our case ... i have cleared you with their missive ..." iddin-aššur answered the attorney of šalim-aššur's firm, ennam-aššur and ṣilliya, ali-ahum's representative, and iddin-aššur said: "... in ... of our case ... guarantors of ennam-aššur and ali-ahum ... the investors of our father šalim-aššur who is dead ... a tablet of 40 talents of good copper ... of those who settled our case ... you will clear me with the investors of your father, šalim-aššur. the investors of your father are many. you have cleared me with ikūnpīya, but many investors of your father remain, so clear me with your father's investors, and i shall raise no claim against you in accordance with those who settled our case. today, not only have you cleared me, but you say: 'you are cleared! do not raise claim against šalim-aššur's sons!' now, you have raised a complaint against me and you have burdened me with a lot of expenses. although i have taken nothing for my father's firm, you keep writing to me about lawsuits and expenditure. if any of the investors of your father raises claim, then i too will raise claim against you." the durhumit colony in plenary session gave us for these proceedings, and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by ennam-aššur son of ahiya, by puzur-ištar son of iddin-suen, by ahiya son of lalum."
5 minas of scrap (copper) in the steppe for transport. from qaṭṭarā until hamizānum 0.3333 mina of tin for transport. i replaced a donkey and had to balance 1 mina and 15 shekels of tin. from burallum until birtu'um 17 shekels of tin for transport. 7 shekels of tin from the town of the kaneshites until timilkiya as hire for a wagon. from timilkiya until hur(a)ma as hire of a donkey i paid 2 shekels of silver (and) 2 shekels of tin. from hura<ma> until luhsaddiya 3 shekels of silver (and) 3 shekels of tin as hire of a donkey.
seal of iddin-abum son of itūr-ilī, seal of unuba, seal of ašiat. unuba and ašiat, dan-aššur's slaves, owe 15 minas of washed copper to luzi. reckoned from the week of amurrum-bāni and aššur-nādā they must pay within 4 weeks. they must pay using our weight stones. if they have not paid (in time) they must add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony. month hubur eponymy iddin-abum.
šar-adad brought 1 -textile belonging to aššur-taklāku from the ... 1 -textile belonging to ... remains in šar-adad's possession. it was taken from the import duty. amur-šarrassa brought 1 -textile belonging to yaya and irišum received it. adad-bāni brought 1 -textile and it was irišum who received it.ennam-aššur son of amur-ištar brought 1 -textile and it was irišum who received it.
while šalim-aššur, šu-bēlum and enna-suen seized each other, šu-bēlum said to šalim-aššur: why do you detain us?" šalim-aššur answered: "i detain you because of the debt of your father, for which i paid silver." šu-bēlum asked: "for how much silver do you detain us? do you detain us for 1 talent or for 2 talents of silver?" šalim-aššur answered: "i detain you for either 1 or 2 talents according to the certified tablets, stating that i paid silver for the debt of your father. but including its interest it has become 5 talents of silver." šu-bēlum reminded us: "keep this in mind, what was sworn by an oath by the city." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by amurrum-bāni, by šu-kūbum. "
say to elamma, thus aššur-mālik: compared with the tablet from the city 1 is missing. uzua said: 'they did not count the textiles in the city, they (simply) entrusted the bags to me'. they took 1 textile when levying the import tax, 2 textiles got lost in the palace from / at the time of your ... and you made good 1 textile, 1 textile uṣur-ša-aššur, aššur-imittī's son, will compensate. seize him there and let him give you the -textile. i deposited a textile in the colonial office as your share, 1 textile lamassutum took. the harnessor took his 2 textiles, 31 textiles bēlum-bāni brought you. of the 25 dark textiles they took 3 textiles as import-tax, lamassutum took 1 textile, 21 dark textiles, apart those for wrapping, bēlum-bāni brought you. why did you take 2 pieces of the textiles? give their price to bēlum-bāni. after uzua's tin for expenses had been spent they took 17 minas of tin during the journey. his working capital was 0.5 mina of silver, i sent 0.3333 mina to him en route. a donkey died during the journey and they compensated him 1 mina of tin. and i balanced him 0.3333 mina of tin. the road-tax amounted to 5 minas per (talent), the head-tax to [x] shekels per (person). the food cost [x] minas 5 shekels per (person / donkey), 8 minas 27 shekels of silver the first? (shipment?), 3 minas 45 shekels of silver is what lalum deposited. 2 (or: 11?) -textiles, 4 dark textiles [...]; (for) 1 -textile that i deposited as your share (and) [1 ]-textile that i myself deposited, [... x]+3.5 shekels of silver of the trader are booked on your [tablet].""
one shekel of silver in hurama i gave to the inn; 12 shekels (the cost) of smuggling textiles i gave in luhuzaddiya to ikuppiya, son of dāya; 3 shekels of tin [for the donk]eys (and) his lodging ... i gave [to / in... ... ... ... ...]; [x shekels of tin] at the bridge; [x shekels of t]in i gave to the inn in šamuha; i gave 1.5 shekel of silver as wages of a porter until šamuha; 3 shekels of tin i gave in hatika'itra, 1.5 shekel of tin i gave in kutiya to the mayor; 12 shekels of tin i gave in karahna to the commander. from karahna until kuburnat the costs of porters amounted to 3 shekels of silver; 6 shekels of silver import-tax to / for... ... ... ... i gave; 2 shekels of tin i paid for the inn.
ilī-dan and his brother salliya owe 45 minas of refined silver to šalim-aššur. month allanātum, eponymy aššur-idī. they must pay 15 minas in 30 weeks; after 30 weeks have passed they must pay 15 minas of silver within 30 weeks, and after the terms are up for the second payment, they must pay 15 minas of silver within 30 weeks. aššuriš-tikal owes 10 minas of refined silver to šalim-aššur. month kuzallu, eponymy aššur-idī. he must pay 3.3333 minas of silver in 30 weeks; he must pay 3.3333 minas in 50 weeks; he must pay (the last) 3.3333 minas of silver in 70 weeks. 1.3333 mina owed by lā-qēpum son of izēzam-ilī; 4 minas of silver owed by ištar-ilšu son of ukappin-ahi. copies of certified tablets from kuburnat.
from ali-ahum to šu-ištar and ištar-lammassī: if the grain has arrived from tumliya, give 2 30-litre measures of grain to amur-ištar's maid. ... are sealed in a sack. haššui and nakiled are bringing it to you.
11 containers with copper under the seal of ennam-aššur and the attorney; (and) 6 boxes with tablets under the seal of ennam-aššur, adida, ali-ahum and the attorney, which we entrusted to enah-ilī, we brought out. witnessed by aššur-bani son of kutaya, by bēlum-bani son of aššur-bēl-awātim.
to ennam-aššur from šu-nūnu: in accordance with your missive which you wrote to me and to aššur-kāšid we have seized him ... and he said: apart from some 1.5 mina of silver ... under his seal ... i gave." he did not give me any silver! ... i said: "produce for me ... copper." ... he answered: "... in court." i answered: "in case i did give you the silver, should i in fact also give that very silver to him?" he answered: "i shall pay." witnessed by ikūn-pīya son of adallal, by šu-ištar son of šukkutum."
say to hinnāya and elamma, thus iddin-abum: 35 shekels of refined silver enlil-bāni, son of sasaya, owes (me); his sealed debt-note is among my tablets (that are) in durhumit, in the house of hinnāya. please, my fathers, seize him and make him pay the silver. if he protests and says: 'i will pay him the silver when he comes up' - he must not leave for the countryside, seize him and make him pay the silver and let one of you give him a quittance stating that his debt-note is no longer valid." say to elamma: "aššur-mūtappil, son of šu-bēlum, brought you 2 -textiles provided with dadiya's seal. please, my father, my lord, the tablet by which i owe you 33 shekels of silver, put it under seal and give it to a reliable affiliated trader, to bring it to me.""
to ali-ahum from kaluwa: listen to the instructions that come from puzur-aššur, his missives, and ... then my own message will go to him from here. also, my dear brother and friend, apart from you i have no brother and friend, so do not say: i have appointed an agent with me." pay attention to my message. i too will pay attention to yours. "
from aššur-malik and amur-ištar to ali-ahum: we detained enna-suen here, and he said: i shall go and pay the silver in compliance with my tablet in kanesh, and i shall annul the tablet concerning my debt and the one where innaya is the guarantor - i shall personally do it with both my tablets." we answered: "seal the silver and let it go to innaya and ali-ahum." he said: "i do not have the silver here. i shall go to kanesh and pay." we said: "to kanesh ... appoint an agent." he appointed latarak's son. ... he will pay. ... he has not been cleared ...witnessed by dadaya son of diliya. we shall collect the price of the ... textiles, either silver or gold, in 5 days, and we shall send it with the very first (transport)."
from iddin-suen to ennam-aššur: my dear brother and lord, we have agreed on the price for the textiles as 1 mina of silver with aššur-taklāku and ištar-... seal the textiles with your own seal and give them to them. my dear brother, may the silver not lie idle even this day. send it! it is you who will give me a journey. the silver must not wait. concerning the wool i shall stay one day.
thus šāt-tašmētim, say to puzur-anna and šu-suen: the house has been robbed and i wander around outside. please, my brothers ,come here so that nobody will harm your paternal house. to tūram-ilī ,son of balṭum ,a ... garment has immediately been forwarded. seize him there and let him give you the garment. if you do not come quickly the city will take away the sustenance." say to puzur-anna and šu-suen ,thus šāt-tašmētum: 'why that i keep ... ... ... ,but he does not give you the slave ... ... ... ... ...? if you are really my brothers let nobody harm you. forward the slave to them where you can ,so that the creditors will not sell my father. as for the ... ... you are sending me ,you yourself know that i stripped the garment from my shoulder and gave it to you! provide silver and let one bring it me with the first caravan. if you love your ancestral get moving and come here!""
to šišara [and] aduda from šalim-aššur: 2 talents 10 minas of tin, 4 -textiles, the wrapping, 5 textiles in a top-pack, 7 minas of expense-tin plus 10 minas of sickles; 1 black donkey - all this, belonging to issu-arik, pūšu-kēn and erišum brought. 4 talents 30 minas of tin, 8 black (textiles) to wrap it, 5 black donkeys, 13 robes, 18 minas of expense-tin, 33 minas of scrap metal - all this, belonging to issu-arik, irišum and abu-šalim brought. 6 talents 30 minas of tin under seal, 30 -textiles including the wrapping, 3 donkeys, 30 minas of expense-tin, 30 minas of sickles - all this, belonging to issu-arik, arrived transported by abu-šalim. lā-qēpum sues me without reason, saying: there is no deposit of your father's owed by me. your father's firm has been paid. why do you make declarations for them that anything you have is our joint-stock capital?" so as for the tablets of deposit, check the copies, and lead the witnesses whom issu-arik kept appointing for deposits to the gate of the god, and certify tablets with their testimony, but iddin-abum's tablets which were sealed by šu-illil, amur-ištar and šu-anum you must not open until i arrive. my journey is imminent. "
from šalim-aššur to ennam-aššur: as to the 1 mina of silver that you gave to itūr-ilī and elāli, the sons of puzur-anna, and which they promised to pay here - i have been paid the silver here. give them the tablet with their seals and let them travel. i have been paid the silver. also, send word and let me ask for my tablet so i can annul it.
from ... and the merchant to iliš-tikal and pilah-ištar: zikiki brings you 30 minas of refined silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, under our seals. of the goods transported by šu-nūnu we gave (goods) on credit to a merchant and we laid claim to the silver ... our dear brothers, with this silver buy , either good ones of second quality or (even) ordinary ones - gather together what can be gathered and buy ... if there are akkadian textiles for sale, then buy good clothes for at least 5 minas or more of this silver, either a good or a good thin textile, or a good , a royal dress - and do not worry about a single shekel of silver. further, he also brings you 10 minas of refined silver, votive offerings for aššur, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, under our seals. as with the previous instructions make a collected purchase. the goods ... must be available ... 40 textiles ... to the son of ... 5 shekels each of silver, extra-fine ... do not worry about a single shekel. as for your donkeys, do not worry over a single shekel of silver.
25 shekels of refined silver galdaya of elamma <<of elamma>> will manage. he is held in service with the silver. witnessed by lā-qēpum, by amur-šamaš, by ezē. if he disappears he will add 1 shekel of silver as interest per month.
to adida and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: šalim-bēlī and aššur-pilah bring you 22 good textiles, a donkey, its harness and two . thereof: 12 extra fine , 10 akkadian textiles, 5 thin textiles, 1 -textile, 3 water-proof - if they have entered safely they should remain ... šalim-bēlī and aššur-pilah owe 0.6666 mina 0.5 shekel of silver. they should deduct 1 shekel each on the smuggling of my textiles there. they should pay the rest of the silver (to) lā-qēp's slave. as to the donkey, its harness and the , if šalim-bēlī and his colleagues are delayed, then entrust it to ṭāb-ṣill-aššur so he may lead it here. my dear brothers, i left 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver, the price of a textile, and 21 minas 10 shekels of good copper with you. sell it for silver, seal the silver and let it remain. do not consider it for your own needs. pay the balance of your silver that i owe to ṭāb-ṣill-aššur - his maid and sons, and get my tablet, split it and place it with my tablets. i left 6 sacks with 24 textiles ... under my seal in the store-room. thereof: 12 good textiles, 8 of medium quality, 4 textiles belonging to ušmaya. sell those for silver.
to ali-ahum and aššur-malik; seal of iddin-abum.
3 shekels of refined silver owed by ilī-bāni son of yaya; further, 4.1666 shekels 7.5 grains of silver owed by him.
from ennam-aššur to lā-qēp and anna-anna: why have my servants stayed there until this day, so that i am delayed here because of them? urgent, take care to send me my servants. to lā-qēp: my dear brother, so that i do not get angry at you when i arrive, ... in accordance with my message that arrives with my servants ... let them remain with her under your seal until i arrive; also, take care with the silver from my outstanding claims and clear my claims so that the silver is at hand and let it be with her. collect both grain and firewood from the anatolians before i come. there must be no misconduct. i hear that enna-suen has come up from the city. if he has really come up, send me a report concerning all my merchandise ordered with an express caravan to inform me. also, if itūr-ilī is about to go or has already gone to the city, then write me ... of the city so i can come.
... to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum, šalim-aššur's sons.
seal of lā-qēpum, son of aššur-mālik. seal of dannaya, son of ataya, seal of imdī-ilum, son of šu-labān, that for the 10 minas of tin that ikūn-pī-ištar had given to elamma imdī-ilum received 1.6666 mina of silver. if the investors of ikūn-pī-ištar or his sons raise a claim against elamma imdī-ilum will clear him.
to aššur-nādā, suen-ilšu, and ennam-suen, thus ... ... šarrum-kēn: when we met in wašhaniya yousing said: 'it was not the palace that took the textiles away, it was yousing who took them away!' when it removed them i was not present, the palace itself seized four affiliated traders and they searched my house and removed your textiles. therefore i drew up a tablet for you and i named you my witnesses. i am ready to lead my witnesses down to the gate of the god so that you can acquire a tablet with their seals, those of these four men. please my brother, are we men to fight? if you wish to start a judicial procedure to make me swear, write down your grievances for <your> representatives, so that they can make me swear. give the tablet with my seal that you have in your possession to my representatives. if you do not wish that, have me transferred here, so that i can come to swear. you have taken the initiative, so let us discuss over there."
from i... to ... and kuziziya: kuziziya brought 2 minas of gold and 8 minas of silver. your gold has been sold; its price was ... to you. all this bēlānum and adad-bāni lead to you.
1.3333 mina of checked silver is owed by adada.
11 1 / 4 shekels due from aššur-bāni; 11 shekels due from puzur-aššur; 9 shekels of silver which haršāya's wife owes to aššur-mūtappil, its equivalent i gave to him. in addition to 12 shekels 13 shekels of silver for aššur-mūtappil.
seal of atatiya, son of ennānim, seal of ahu-waqar, son of aššur-rē'ī, seal of amur-aššur, son of šu-išhara, seal of aššur-šamšī, son of ilī-bāni, to the effect that āl-ṭāb seized us against amur-aššur. āl-ṭāb seized us against amur-aššur. āl-ṭāb said to amur-aššur: 'have you and šu-ištar not promised to pay silver, each as his share half of what was the ransom?' amur-aššur answered: 'yes, we have promised it and also that he (each?) would get a one-third share of the profit, as ... ... ... ... ... ... and also would take for his account one third of the losses'.
seal of kakua, son of iddin-ištar
from the to the kanesh colony: the city assembly has passed a verdict in front of the two great pegs in the sacred precinct stating that iddin-suen son of ibaya may hire an attorney, and ... šalim-aššur son of issu-arik ... the eponymy of ilšu-rabi son of baziya. šu-kūbum son of aššur-idī is my attorney.
the colony has passed a verdict: for all the goods that were entrusted to aššur-bēl-awātim, and which šalim-aššūr had taken out, šalim-aššur will give a tablet bearing his seal to šu-kūbum. šu-kūbum will not raise claim against kurub-ištar. if anyone raises claim against šu-kūbum, šalim-aššur will clear him.
from tūram-ilī to ennam-aššur and šu-kūbum: 35 minas of tin is in the possession of aššur-malik, and, further, 27 minas of tin is in the possession of aššur-malik and šu-kūbum - in all: 1 talent 2 minas of tin. approach aššur-malik and have them send me the tin.
from šu-ištar and lā-qēp to the merchant: iddin-abum brought 10 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, under your seal. thereof: 1 talent 5 minas 6 shekels of sealed tin at the rate in silver 15.6666 to 1, in silver: 4 minas 9.3333 shekels; 40 ordinary textiles cost 2.3333 minas of silver; 15.3333 minas 5 shekels of expense-tin at the rate 15 to 1, in silver: 1 mina 1.6666 shekels; 2 black donkeys cost 0.6666 mina 6 shekels of silver; iddin-abum received 0.5 mina of silver, the working capital of a packer; he was paid 2 shekels for his clothing; we gave 5 shekels for the export duty; 5 shekels of silver: harness for the donkeys; 1 shekel: of the . the silver has been spent for you. iddin-abum leads all this to you under our seals.
from ennam-aššur to enna-suen and ili-bāni: i am well. let us be glad! šalim-aššur took nothing on my account. as for our paternal house, i and you are happy! urgent, set out and come. enna-suen has brought 1 shekel of silver the rest that belongs to ilī-bāni. šar-adad has not brought anything belonging to enna-suen. also, if you are in arrears with your working capitals, i shall personally pay them. i have sworn together with ababa.
as issu-arik will go to the city, he sold his houses by the well, where at present šalim-aššur is living, to tudhaliya the brother of tuli. the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings, and we gave a tablet with our testimony before the dagger of aššur. witnessed by sukkalliya son of amur-aššur, by akuza son of šu-anum, by uraya son of manana.
3 shekels of silver is owed by kukkulānum.
the kanesh colony gave me for these proceedings and i gave my testimony before aššur's dagger.
uṣur-ša-aššur son of atata owes 1 mina 15 shekels of refined silver to ah-šalim. reckoned from the week of aššur-malik son of sukkalliya he is to pay within 12 weeks. if he has not paid he will add interest at the rate 1.5 shekel per month per mina. month hubur, eponymy aššur-malik son of ali-ahum. witnessed by puzur-anna son of ennam-aššur, by ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur.
memoranda with witnesses concerning the proceeds of ušinalam's wool.
to ennam-aššur and ali-ahum from damiq-pī-aššur: as to the 160 textiles belonging to the merchant, thereof 19 are your textiles. take a decision concerning the goods. the textiles of extra-fine quality belong to the merchant. my dear brothers, send me the silver that was the proceeds of my tin which eništārum brought to you. eništārum should not be delayed, send him and listen closely. send me small goods worth 5 shekels of silver. eništārum...-aššur ... has come ... of our ... cowrie-shell ... send me small goods.
0.3333 mina of silver, the price of 2 textiles transported by puzur-aššur that aššur-bēl-awātim sent to ali-ahum - šu-ištar brought him the silver.
the tablet (with the testimony given) in the gate of the god, which in kuburnat abaya and anah-ili entrusted to me, in kanesh to atata, son of mannum-balum-assur, in the presence of assur-bani, son of ili-alum and of assur-ennam, son of belum-bani i entrusted it.
1 shekel of silver: bēlum-bāni;
from enam-aššur to mannum-balum-aššur and ennam-aššur; specifically to ennam-aššur: a tablet stating that aššur-taklāku owes 5 minas of silver to puzur-anna is in your house. look at my tablets there, and if the tablet is indeed there, show it to ennam-aššur and then let the tablet be in your possession. also, send word to me.
seal of elamma, son of iddin-suen, seal of susāya, son of isihum, seal of ennam-suen, son of kukurānum. tablet of the declared value (of the goods) of elamma, susaya and ennam-suen.
ikūn-pīya seized us against the attorney of šalim-aššur, and ikūn-pīya said: of the 40 talents of good copper that i entrusted, thereof i personally took 10 talents of copper and you took 30 talents of copper." the attorney answered: "i personally took it" the attorney continued: "and the son of šalim-aššur has been cleared for us iddin-aššur." witnessed by ennam-aššur by ṭāb-ṣill-aššur, by lulu."
from iddin-abum to ennam-aššur and alāhum: here i have taken 3 talents 55 minas of black copper on your account in the colony office. my dear brothers, take care to satisfy the investors there for the copper that i have balanced with the investors of your father, and withdraw mine. if this does not happen, you will be sorry about everything the investors have contracted with me.
to šu-aššur and dumana say, thus ikūn-pīya: 2 -textiles of āl-ṭāb [x] of good quality, [x] scarfs, one of which belongs to temple-funds of (the gods) suen and šamaš, dumana is bringing you please, my brother, assist dumana and ... ... ... ... ... ... ... let him ... ... ... ... ... ... ... and take care to get as payment for them silver of extra good quality. the silver must arrive with me while i am staying here. please, my brother, send me the price that the scarfs of the temple-fund yield with the first caravan.""
0.3333 mina of refined silver aššur-taklāku owed to aššur-ṭāb. with that silver aššur-ṭāb has been satisfied. the tablet recording a debt of 0.3333 mina of silver owed by aššur-taklāku which turns up is invalid. in the presence of ilī-ašranni son of tūr-aššur
that ennānum, son of azua, owes 2 minas of refined silver to elamma. month iii, eponymy of the successor of aššur-damiq, son of abarsisum, week eponymy of aššur-imittī, son of atāya. he will pay 0.6666 mina per year; if he does not pay he will add an interest of 1.5 shekel per mina per month. in the presence of en(n)ānum, of lā-qēpum. for 11 -textiles aššur-lamassī will confirm to elamma (the liability of) āmur-ištar and ali-ahum within 5 months. if he does not confirm their liability aššur-lamassī will pay to elamma 25 shekels of silver apiece. month vii, eponymy of puzur-nirah. in the presence of abu-šalim son of iddin-erra, of iddin-aššur, son of bursa / isum.
18 shekels of silver belonging to ennam-aššur is owed by aššur-bāni. 13 ½ minas of -copper belonging to ennam-aššur is owed by ennam-rēṣum. concerning 1 mina 5 shekels of silver he has left a certified tablet about the debt of ennam-rēṣum to ikūn-pīya.
1 mina of silver belonging to hinnāya elamma dispatched to iddin-suen, ṣeher-ilī brought it away. witnessed by naniya, by aššur-ṭāb.
0.6666 mina of refined silver - he cut it off with the (1-)mina weight of amur-šamaš, without surcharge - ir'am-aššur, irišum and ilī-wedāku owe to uṣur-ša-aššur. from the week of aššur-idī and šu-ištar, month ix, eponymy year of adad-bāni, they will pay within 4 weeks. if they do not pay they will add (an interest of) 1.5 shekel per mina per month. they are jointly liable for the silver. in the presence of ṭāb-aššur, of šu-ištar.
from ikūn-pīya to ibni-ilī, ennam-aššur and ...; (specifically) to ennam-aššur: 1 -textile for your maid when you went to the villages ... indeed its price... for purchases ... its price should remain ... you have not sold ...
from the silver of ištar-lamassī that she gave to her sons and which silver rested as safe deposit in elamma's house, from that silver iliya, when he was still alive, took 7 shekels from his share. after the sons of kūn-ilum had died, (when) our brothers arrived for bewailing them and for removing the chair of their mother, 19.5 shekels of silver both for bewailing them and for the chair of their mother, and 7.5 shekels of silver to the anatolian, because of iliya for his debt, were paid. the rest of the silver was sent to address of their sister, the daughter of kūn-ilum, to the city, by son of aššur-dān and šumi-abiya, the representatives of kūn-ilum's sons.
to puzur-aššur from ani-wani: you left 3 months ago and you have sent me nothing. dan-aššur has given me 2 shekels of silver here, he himself. as to the lead, no one will take it. us four, what are we to eat? why do you not send any silver, with damqaya's servant, for we are dying from hunger! indeed, the netherworld has arrived. if you do not send me silver for my food i shall set out and come! if you are truly my lord - take care!
to šalim-aššur from abu-šalim: išar-bēli has sold 13 donkeys. also, with respect to the 30 -textiles which they will receive in ulama, the wool ...the palace ... and he himself ... i shall credit to my lord. check him there so he may pay you in full. any harnessor whatever ...
say to kuliya, thus aššur-imittī: in šalatuwar i gave you 44 shekels of silver as counter value in the name of your servant abī-ilī. according to our agreement, should abī-ilī not have given me my silver, you would give me 66 shekels of silver. when you came up from the city we did not meet and you went back. i carry with me 2 minas and 7 shekels of silver under the seals of ennam-suen and alpilī. please, my brother, write me that i can take the silver or what has been bought with it during two business trips and then i will give the rest of your silver where you will instruct me.
the lady wrote me that aluwa brought a kutānu worth 15 shekels and a šulhu worth 4.5 shekels.
14.5 shekels of silver is owed by ilī-dan son of šukkutum. 2 minas 10 shekels of silver is owed by šu-ištar, the wailer. ...son of edišin ... for 10 years (interest) will accrue to them at the rate 10 shekels per ... they are jointly liable. 15 shekels of gold and 2.5 minas of copper is owed by abum-ilī son of abela. 5.5 shekels of silver is owed by adad-pilah son of ahu-waqar. witnessed by pilah-... 5 minas x shekels of silver is owed by hazuwalla. 1 mina of silver belonging to me and puzur-ištar son of illil-bāni is owed by bēlu-dan and lā-qēp. 0.6666 mina of silver: nadibum. 0.6666 mina: iddin-aššur. for 3 minas: isuhu. 0.5 mina 5 shekels: akabi. 1.5 mina: nab-suen (and) ennam-ištar. 1.3333 mina 2 shekels: ahu-waqar son of abaya. 1 mina 13 shekels: eri-ilī and his brother šu-ištar. 1 mina 15 shekels is owed by mannu-kī-iliya; he is to pay when the grain is ripe. if he has not paid (in time) 0.3333 mina per mina will accrue (as interest). from the eponymy of iddin-suen son of šuli. 10 shekels of , 1 mina of copper from ..., 0.3333 mina less 2 shekels is owed by ilšu-dan. 6.5 shekels of silver is owed by by ilum-idī. witnessed by hannānum. 1 textile (worth) 0.3333 mina 4 shekels i invested in the caravan of akutum son of illil-bāni. 0.5 mina of silver and 1 talent of copper: ištar-pālil son of arši-ah. 1 textile (worth) 0.3333 mina 4 shekels, 1 textile (worth) 15 shekels of silver ennam-aššur invested in akutum's caravan. of the debt of hazuwalla for huma... aguwa guarantees with the silver for 1 mina of silver.
say to aššur-šamšī and ennam-suen, thus āl-ṭāb. say in particular to aššur-šamšī: why are youplur. writing me as follows: 'come here, we must submit the expenditures'? the creditor keeps a check on me (because) i have to pay 1 mina of silver! how could i come while i do not even have 10 shekels of silver available? please, my brothers, wait one month more for me. if he treats you in a violent way, yea even turns to the colony and the colony makes you appear in court, then i am with you in it! my dear father, could i hold you in contempt? do we have any father but you? i will travel on to tuhpiya and try to get some silver, 10 or 20 shekels, as much as i need for my expenses, then i will get moving and depart for you. you, my father, ... ... ... ... ... ...!"
as to the 100 kutānu-textiles, 4 talents of tin and its addition, 5 donkeys that šu-bēlum and itūr-ilī checked in ... and timelkiya, i paid 2 minas 10 shekels of silver for carriage of the tin and the textiles from hahhum to hurama.
aššur-šamšī and ennam-suen seized us and ennam-suen said to aššur-šamšī: give me the silver that accrues to me". aššur-šamšī answered: "i will / can not give you the silver, for i have ... ... you ... ... for ... ... ". ennam-suen said: "why is it me that you are... ... ... ... ... ... me? do it to your sons!" aššur-šamšī answered: "i will personally take your expenses for my account". in the presence of zuba (and) of puzur-adad; ali-abum, son of zia was our colleague. for these words the kanesh colony made us available and this tablet (with) our testimony we presented before aššur's dagger."
the missive concerning silver that iddin-abum sent to itūr-ilī and ali-ahum.
seal of akuza son of šu-anum, seal of šu-anum son of ...ki, seal of iddin-abum. concerning the 2 minas of gold that ikūn-pī-aššur gave to iddin-abum son of issu-arik, so he may write his name in the city together with his investors - he has been paid the silver.
x tables that were in front of his gods; 1 chair that was in front of aššur; 1 goblet that was in front of šarru-mātēn; 2 salt-, 1 silver goblet and a flask that was in front of uqur; 5 weapons, 2 -containers, 1 heart of silver, 1emblem and 1 wax tablet - all this, belonging to kura's son. when ennam-aššur opened his main house he left kura's ... witnessed by kukuwa, by mannum-kī-iliya.
thus šu-išhara, say to pilah-ištar, uṣur-ša-aššur and abu-šalim, and in particular to uṣur-ša-aššur: 4 talents of wool, 2 black donkeys and their harness, belonging to the merchant, which i entrusted to you in the presence of witnesses, whereby i said: 'the merchandise belongs to the merchant, it must not be seized! convert it the very day it arrives into silver and let abu-šalim not stay around for even 5 days!' while you were not to let him stay around for 5 days you made him stay 7 months! please, my brother, the very day you hear this tablet, you must entrust the merchandise to pilah-ištar and abu-šalim so that they bring it here. moreover, why are you treating me with contempt? if [you] are my father ... ...""
to kuziziya, ištar-lamassī, nāb-suen, anna-anna, amur-ištar, šalim-wardī and mannum-kī-iliya from ennam-aššur: 1 ½ mina 5 shekels of silver sealed by kukuwa and by me, 7 donkeys and their harness - all this belonging to me, mannum-kī-iliya brings to you. in addition to this silver that mannum-kī-iliya brings to you, for the 3 minas of silver and its interest that kukuwa owes to mannum-kī-aššur son of puzur-ištar, and for which he holds 20 talents of wool as security - say to my representatives: whatever silver ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya ask for there, lend them silver against interest according to the rate of the colony - from which silver you have received from my outstanding claims, or silver i sent to anna-anna under my seal, and transfer 1 mina of refined silver thereof to them, write a debt-note for ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya, her son, certify it with joint liability, and give the tablet to my maid so it may remain in her possession until i come. also, you must personally assist ištar-lamassī and mannum-kī-iliya and pay the silver to mannum-kī-aššur or to mannum-kī-aššur's representatives, and as to the 20 talents of wool and the -stone that mannum-kī-aššur holds as security, when you pay the silver let him identify mannum-kī-iliya's seal in case the wool is sealed, and then take out the tablet of the 3 minas of silver and its interest, entrust this tablet and the -stone to ištar-lamassī. also, when the silver is paid, set witnesses to prove that the wool is mine. also, check the wool for šalim-wardī and mannum-kī-iliya, and set witnesses for them about how much wool you clear, namely that the wool and 7 donkeys belong to ennam-aššur; then seal the wool and entrust it under your seals together with my other goods so they may conduct it here. may šalim-wardī act for them as he was instructed here.
say to kūn-ilum, thus amur-aššur: as for aššur-šamšī's copper, about which you wrote me, saying: 'when i left i decided to entrust to you (the collection of) copper from my outstanding claims, saying: 'produce the copper and send 3.5 talents of copper to aššur-šamšī'. of the outstanding claims you authorized us to collect, 1 talent 3 minas are owed by šumi'ar, (but) šumi'ar has died and his sons live until today in kunanamit, so that the copper has been tied up. they have now come here, but they contested 23 minas of the copper, saying: 'our father only owes 40 minas, the price of a golden bead!' i answered them: '40 minas, the price of the golden bead plus 23 minas, the price of tin, together 1 talent 3 minas is what your father owes!' they said: 'we will find the copper for you and then, when you swear you can take it'. as for the 1 talent that duduna owes, i seized him and he said: 'i have no copper, let it become interest bearing'. for the 1 talent of refined copper he will pay 1.5 talent of refined copper, in late spring. 43 minas of copper, the price of a slave-girl is [due by?] zizulayali.""
the 10 shekels of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, that ikūn-pīya owes to puzur-ištar in the city - šu-hubur has received that here. if ikūn-pīya did not owe anything to puzur-ištar, he must pay (a fine of) mina for mina the silver he received. month hubur, eponymy buzutaya. witnessed by ṣilluš-dagān, by ilīma-aššur.
0.6666 mina of refined silver, the working capital of ir'am-aššur, aššur-rabi has in his possession. with the silver aššur-rabi is held (in service). witnessed by aššur-rabi, by ennam-aššur
šu-bēlum owes x shekels of refined silver to šu-illil; he is held in service with the silver - including his tablet from kanesh. witnessed by šalim-aššur son of iliya, by sasiya. ilī-idī owes 0.3333 mina less 2 shekels of silver to šu-illil. witnessed by emeni, by ilī-ašrannī son of šu-ištar. 2 minas of refined silver is owed by šu-kūbum ... he must pay. amurrum-bāni took 20 minas of copper for grain. witnessed by iddin-abum, by šalim-aššur son of iliya. ennam-aššur owes 70 grain to šu-illil. he is to measure out the good grain in a year. witnessed by ...ni, by šu-anum. after 6 months have passed a year will pass and he must pay 1 mina ...
as to šu-anum son of lā-qēp - šu-anum knows the testimony of(?) ikuppiya concerning 8 minas of silver, a cauldron of 30 minas and the slave kilya (given to?) amur-ištar son of išār-kitt-aššur, (grand)son of damuma.
to [ennam-aššur] from abi-... i received ... from kura. ... kurziya ... 4 talents owed by aššur-imittī. 3 talent 23 minas of copper owed by iliš-tikal. ... amur-assur and ataya ... i owe to you. 20 minas, the proceeds from abī-ilī's is in my possession. 8.5 minas owed by abī-ilī. in all: you left me 18 talents 50.5 minas of copper as outstanding claims. of that i received 2.5 talents from kura, 2 talents from aššur-imittī, 2 talents 17 minas from iliš-tikal, 1 talent from amur-aššur, 1 talent 38 minas from kurzī and šu-nisaba - in all 9 talents 25 minas of copper that i received from your outstanding claims. also, i personally added 36 minas and i paid 10 talents 1 mina to the men from purušhaddum. 35 minas ... šumi-abiya ... 30 minas ... for the office of the colony ... ... i shall lead out and i shall have the silver of the merchant paid, and convert the rest of your colony to silver. as to pūšu-kēn's copper and his ... i shall sell it for silver, set out and leave.
thus bēlānum and lamassutum, say to šamaš-bāni and pilah-ištar: 26 textiles belonging to šu-suen, son of iliya, are packed in 5 bags under the seals of ennam-aššur, son of elamma. separately 1 -garment of uṣur-ša-aššur that has been sealed later? is also available. in all 27 textiles, <to> aššur-šamšī, son of nanakaš(š)um, ennam-aššur, son of elamma entrusted (them). before šalim-aššur, son of azida, aššur-mālik, son of ennam-aššur, (and) suen-nādā, son of akazi, he entrusted (them) to him. the man is stupid. pilah-ištar has with him 2 missives of ennam-aššur. if aššur-šamšī protests against releasing the textiles, let him hear the missive of ennam-aššur and let him entrust the textiles (and?) the seals of the bags to youplur and cound them! out to his brother pilah-ištar, who must act in accordance with our instruction. take care!""
ali-ahum answered ennam-aššur, saying: the memoranda have your seal and mine. come on, let us seize 3 (witnesses). let us settle the affair in accordance with the memoranda sealed by us; further, our father left a tablet behind about how much silver he set down as owed by me and you, and our father's investors kept the tablet and they have placed it before the colony, and the colony has entrusted the tablet to the attorney. come on, let us pay even today as much silver as we are booked for, let us seal it in accordance with the verdict of the city and go to the city. let us not obstruct the tablet of the city and the attorney." this is not a formal lawsuit but a witnessed statement."
from šalim-aššur to iddin-abum, ennānum, inah-ilī, ikūn-piya, šu-ištar and ennam-aššur: aššur-rabi and his brother, the sons of akuza, owe me 8 minas 13 shekels of silver. i hear that the silver has been received. for the 8 minas of silver he must add interest with this ... for 4 years. whether the lady has received it or ennam-aššur has received it, take the capital sum from the man, for the lady is tied down. you are to pay the silver and it must become available for her. if it is like that, make an agreement with the man. take interest for a single year and ... pay in full. my dear brothers, make the lady listen to the letter.
seal of šu-bēlum son of issu-arik; to his brother enna-suen and to ali-ahum son of šalim-aššur.
seal of ištar-pālil, son of šu-kūbum, seal of nimar-ištar, son of bala, seal of abu-šalim, son of ilī-ālum. 0.5 mina of refined silver ištar-pālil, son of šu-kūbum, owes to the creditor. from the week-eponymy of ellil-bāni, month x, he will add 1 shekel per month for this silver. eponymy of hanna-nārum.seal of ištar-pālil, son of šu-kūbum, seal of aššuriš-tikal, son of hinnāya, seal of ali-ahum, son of susāya, seal of puzur-ištar, son of šu-kūbum, seal of bēlum-bāni, son of gaziya, seal of ab-šalim, the wife of ali-ahum. 0.5 mina of refined silver ištar-pālil, ab-šalim, the wife of ali-ahum, and the sons of ali-ahum owe to the creditor. from the week-eponymy of hanāya, month ix, they will add 1.5 shekel as interest per month per mina. the silver is bound on [the one of them] who is solvent and reliable. eponymy of hanna-nārum. bēlum-bāni, son of gaziya, assisted ab-šalim and the sons of ali-ahum. a tablet of 24 minas and 35 shekels of tin, on the name of 'creditor', has been deposited as pledge. this silver was taken in the name of ali-ahum. seal [of aššur-taklāku, son of qardāya, seal of ṭāb-ṣilli-aššur, son of aššur-balāṭī, seal of dadāya, son of nimar-ištar. 24 minas 35 shekels of kukru-tin (and) 4 textiles dadāya, son of nimar-ištar, owes to the creditor. from the week eponymy of aššur-taklāku, son of ali-ahum, he shall pay within [16 weeks. if, when his term is due, he has not paid, [he will add an interest of 1.5 shekels per month. month xi, year eponymy of maṣi-ilī. he will pay the full amount of tin without (deducting) fees and [transport costs.
11 shekels of silver belonging to amur-ištar is owed by ennam-aššur. witnessed by aššur-bāni.
from šalim-aššur to abuwa, aššur-ṭāb, adida, ennam-aššur, ali-ahum and aluwa; specifically to aššur-ṭāb: when aziya's son and the attorney went to kanesh to collect your brother aššur-idī's silver, you and uṣur-ša-aššur's representatives confronted the plenary assembly of the colony in the sacred precinct, and you received a tablet from the colony, concerning the 4 minas of silver for which šalim-aššur, you and uṣur-ša-aššur had taken responsibility because of aššur-idī - a tablet stating that the colony passed a verdict in your favour, that aššur-bāni is to pay the 4 minas of silver, and i shall produce your tablet from šalim-aššur's house. as for the tablet, if you bring it for him, aluwa shall return with you. if aššur-ṭāb does not carry that tablet, he must write to his representatives, that they must release the tablet - wherever it may be - before the colony. the colony should entrust it to an affiliated trader, and aluwa shall come together with the one who brings the tablet. to aššur-ṭāb: take care to do me a favour!
1 ... saddlecloth, 4 ropes, 2 pack-saddles, a sack, a box with dulbatum, a box with kamaru-fish, two ropes, in durhumit. a box of ili-bani, son of mutalum, 3 shekels of silver he owes. 1.3333 mina of silver of anah-ili will go to alpili, .5 mina of silver will go with the first opportunity i have. all this is with alpili 10 minas of copper with the wife of assur-damiq of tuhpiya, a donkey with its harness (and) separately 3 shekels of silver he owes to asanum.
to ennam-aššur; seal of amur-ištar. 3 minas of copper and 2 shekels of silver ...
to ennam-aššur; seal of ištar-rabi'at.
sealed by šu-tammuzī, elaya, ennam-aššur son of elamma and lamassī; to ennam-aššur.
irišum seized dādiya and irišum said: give me the hire in silver for the 4 donkeys that you packed!" dādiya answered: "there, pack the donkeys (yourself)!" irišum said: "i have asked you once or twice, but you have not given it to me. you keep cheating me on the packing of the donkeys, yet i did rent the donkeys to you for 10 shekels of silver each. give me the silver, or i shall seize it from your silver. there, know this!""
to dadaya, ali-ahum and illil-bāni from puzur-aššur: šu-hubur son of iddin-abum should pay you 0.3333 mina 2 shekels of silver, and then pay this silver to ilill-bāni son of aššur-malik, obtain the release of my tablet, split it and place it with my other tablets with ali-ahum. my dear brothers, take care to have šu-hubur pay the silver and obtain the release of my tablet for me.
18 dark textiles and 10 -textiles, 2 talents of tin with its wrapping, under his seals applied in the city, 2 black donkeys with their harness belonging to ali-ahum, i entrusted to aššuriš-tikal.
the attorney ababa and ali-ahum received 16 talents 13 minas of good copper; thereof 6 talents 40 minas of good copper, the price of silver - from ilī-dan.
10 minas of refined silver, its excise added, his transport fee paid, belonging to the merchant, for iliya and the representatives of lā-qēp, and separately 0.3333 mina of silver from iliya's free loan. 1 shekel of silver, his consignment for erra-ilī. 0.3333 mina of silver for 3 -textiles, 3 shekels of silver, her consignment for šī-šarra all this of lā-qēp. 0.6666 mina of silver for dadiya, 0.3333 mina for ennam-aššur, 0.3333 mina for aššur-rēṣī, 3 shekels for aššur-rēṣī, in all 4 packets of elamma, all this belonging to lā-qēp i entrusted to šu-bēlum. in the preence of aššur-nādā, son of aššur-idī, (and) of šu-suen, son of šu-hubur.
to adida and ali-ahum from idnaya. i keep hearing that ali-ahum will function as envoy in the case of blood-money. if you are truly my brother, provide me with some 5 shekels of silver as sacrifice in addition to my silver, and my dear brother, i shall contantly see your eyes from a hundred miles away. provide me with a sacrifice and i shall pray to ištar-the-star, our god. to ali-ahum: why have you agreed to service as envoy? according to the verdict of ... you have not paid ... to the colony ...
1 mina and 10 shekels of refined silver are owed by ikūnu(m) to šu-ištar, witnessed by adada, the scribe, and by imlikaya. 1 -textile, separately, i left to him and 7.5 shekels of silver are owed (for it?) by iddin-dagan. 5 shekels of silver owed by aššur-mālik, 28 shekels of tin owed by puzur-aššur.
i gave 10 shekels of tin to bēlānum's possession.
thus iddin-suen say to enna(m)-suen: why did you write me as follows: 'i took the tin as balance payment and i have promised a rate of 7 shekels to 1 in silver.' you the tin and unpacked it, you have ... ... ... ... if you want to take tin for silver why do you keep practicing deceit, so that i cannot fail to be angry because you have ... ... ... ... ... ... and angry too about the silver that you requested? why have you held back the garment my sister had sent me to wear? send me also the ... ... garments that you held back, . [then] leave and come here ... ... ... ... ... ..."."
when kudātum went to the city i dedicated 4 shekels of silver as a blessing for him.
[seal of ilī-tap]pā, son of idnāya, seal of abatanānum, son of aššur-šamšī, seal of iddin-suen, son of aššur-ṭāb. [x she]kels of refined silver abatanānum owes to elamma. month v, eponymy of ilšu-rabi, son of baziya. [within x] weeks he shall pay; if he does not pay he will add interest in accordance with the rule of the colony.
3 talents of washed copper under my seal, and further, 20 minas of washed copper he received -
say to puzur-aššur and ikūn-pī-aššur, thus šu-ištar: please, my lords, take care to make idnāya pay the silver and the interest on it. consider where silver of idnāya, if only 10 shekels, may turn up. if the man indeed has silver, then warn šamaš-bāni that he must not allow him to drink water. (for) the silver is your silver! the man is a crook, let him not cheat you! take care to make him pay the silver and the interest on it!""
urgent, urgent, do not tarry a single day from the day šēp-ištar and his donkeys arrive! do not acquire an outstanding claim of a single shekel of copper! enter either purušhaddum or šalatuar, wherever you can realise a single shekel profit for the merchant, so your copper will be available at the current rate of the merchants. so, sell either cheap or dear, set out and come! i wait for you for my journey. also sell the donkeys and have the price of the donkeys be available in silver. pay attention and come here!
thus aššur-mālik, say to āl-ṭāb and ennum-aššur: aššur-taklāku is bringing you 7 shekels of silver under my seal. buy there scarfs? of eave of extremely good quality, seal them and hand them over to aššur-taklāku and if you are really friends convey them to me with the first caravan. heed my request, my brothers, and i too can listen to what you say! the boy must not be seen there, send him quickly here so that i can please the gentleman. separately he has with him 0.5 shekel of silver for (buying) olive oil". say to āl-ṭab: "as for the silver of elal / niuman and your brother's wife, when the lady arrives ... ... ... ... ... ..."."
... puzur-ištar son of šu-anum owes 0.3333 mina less 2 shekels of refined silver to irišum. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī and amur-ištar he is to pay within 2 months. if he has not paid at the completion of his term ...
0.5 mina of bronze pins is owed by puzur-aššur.
to amurrum-bāni, (...), ennam-bēlum, šar-adad and panaka from šalim-aššur: panaka and aššur-rabi son of nīde-bāni are bringing you 12 minas of refined silver - its import duty added, its transport tariff paid, under my seal, that i owe on aššur-bēl-awātim's joint-stock capital, for the first instalment. they also bring my tablet concerning 12 minas of silver from my debt, which i am to pay to them in 5 years. here i entrusted the silver and the tablet to them with 3 affiliated traders as witnesses. as to 20 minas 10 shekels of silver from wahšušana that is with šu-nūnu and šu-kūbum, let them bring you the silver under my seal and then let them give you the old tablet concerning 24 minas of silver and place it with my tablets. as to the silver and the tablet that panaka and aššur-rabi are bringing to you, pay the silver and give the tablet concerning my debt to šu-kūbum's representatives. if my term is not yet up, note it in your memorandum. entrust the silver from wahšušana to the lady and the girl, and let it remain in my house.
of the copper belonging to man-mahir which ennam-aššur left me, 3 talents 8 minas of good quality was cleared in my possession; further, 30 minas of good copper, also belonging to man-mahir, which he left me - good quality - all this copper is in my possession.
puzur-ištar owes 0.3333 mina less 2 shekels of refined silver to irišum. reckoned from the week of aššur-imittī and his partner he is to pay within 2 months. if he has not paid (in time) he is to add interest according to the rule of the colony every month. witnessed by mušueni, by ataya.
puzur-aššur received 0.83333 minas of silver; kibal received 0.83333 mina of silver;
to ali-ahum from puzur-aššur: 48 good textiles, 2 ordinary textiles, 2 textiles belonging to aššur-bēl-awātim, a free loan, 2 talents 10 minas of sealed (tin), 3 black donkeys - all this sealed by ... my representative entrusted ... i am staying in hahhum. i left for the rest of the donkeys (with) the goods but they held up the caravan. my dear brother, decide about your goods. send me word, and i shall not delay. send 1 mina of silver to meet me.
puzur-aššur, son of ikūn-pīya, ennam-aššur, son of iddin-suen, and his brother, iddin-ištar, son of ah-šalim, ištar-bāni, maṣi-ilī ennam-aššur, son of aššur-dān, šumi-abiya - representing the sons of kūn-ilum - collectively paid <the expenses> of bewailing them and of ištar-lamassī's chair from the silver that was in the house of elamma's wife. the son of aššur-dān and šumi-abiya sealed the pouches.
in ... we settled accounts, and for x mina 14 shekels of silver that ... ...
seal of kula brother of šukkutum, seal of puzur-ti'amtum son of ištar-pālil, seal of ennam-aššur son of karria, seal of enna-suen son of iddin-abum, seal of anuli his brother. as to the goods belonging to šalim-aššur that were in hahhum in the house of issu-arik, and which the sons of iddin-abum seized - in accordance with the tablet with a verdict of the city that kakuwa brought, enna-suen and anuli must not raise claim against šalim-aššur with respect to these goods.
to adida, ali-ahum, and uku from puzur-aššur: here he has been paid 0.3333 mina 1 shekel of silver from what we had available, his smuggled goods plus 2 shekel of silver. witnessed by ilī-pilah. if he asks for more there, then let him appoint a stand-in for you and bind him over. to uku from puzur-aššur: have i not told you as follows: 'do not delay by two days. you did not leave me my small goods, a chisel and my woollen fleeces.' if the traveling party is detained there, then give 3 shekels of silver to the guards and send uku to me.
from ikūn-pīya to ibnī-ilī, bekaya and ennam-aššur; specifically to ennam-aššur: i owe you 1.6666 mina 6 shekels of silver. i left surety worth 1 mina 7 shekels of silver plus 9 shekels with you. 8 shekels of silver was either abuwa's fees or expenses here. in all you have received 1 mina 24 shekels of silver. 22 shekels of silver was the rest of your silver; 2.5 minas of silver that i owe you i shall send with aššur-bāni. i left 1 talent of copper with you. if the purchase has not been carried out, then make purchases profitable for me, either -textiles from hahhum or from talhat - my dear brothers, assist ennam-aššur in this, seal it and send it to me with aššur-bāni. to ennam-aššur: ask whether they have brought a missive from the city and send it. in accordance with your missive i expect erišum in durhumit today or tomorrow. when he comes, i shall seize him.
concerning 11 -textiles, belonging to elamma, aššur-lamassī shall confirm the liability of ali-ahum and amur-ištar for elamma within 5 months. if he does not confirm them he shall pay 25 shekels of refined silver apiece. month vii, eponymy of puzur-nirah. if one has taken extra pieces in the palace, on top of the tithe on textiles, what accrues from it to elamma will be deducted for him from his textiles of the caravan of lā-qēp, son of qa'atum. in the presence of iddin-aššur, son of b / pususu, of abu-šalim, son of iddin-erra.
to ikūn-pīya, libbi-ištar, ali-ahum and aššur-malik; specifically to libbi-ištar from puzur-anna: i gave you 3 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, belonging to a merchant. according to our agreement you will give from the purchase in the city either 0.6666 mina or 0.5 mina per mina to the merchant. then, you will personally give 4 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, to me, on behalf of the merchant, and then i shall personally be the merchant; when i come up (to anatolia) from the city i shall give it to you. my dear brother, give whatever silver and purchases you will deposit to my representatives. also, you must personally send me 4 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for, and whatever silver you give to me i shall personally give to you in this way when i come up. to my representatives: if he gives you purchased goods, do not receive them but send me word.
from kuziziya and amur-ištar to ali-ahum: of the 15 textiles that amur-ištar left behind tow textiles have been sold after amur-ištar returned. 4 textiles that abī-anum sent and your own 4 textiles: in all 8 textiles are in my possession. why is it that as for the 6 textiles belonging to abī-anum that you wrote about, apart from the 4 textiles he sent he as not sent anything else? so, until now the 2 textiles agreed by him are (still) outstanding. ask aluwa there, who brought the textiles, about the price of abī-anum's 4 textiles and that of yours. if the men are staying in the sikkātum, then when they arrive i shall send you both ... and the wool ... ... of your 12 textiles ... are present under bēlum-bāni's seal. amur-ištar has not taken any of these textiles.
3 cups and toggle pins, their weight in silver 1 mina, under my seals; separately 26! shekels of silver also under my seals, of elamma; 2 tablets of 2 minas 15 shekels of silver, being in the debt of the anatolian; 1 tablet of 1.5 mina of silver, being the debt of naniya; 1 tablet of 1 mina and 6 shekels of silver, being the debt of būr-suen; 1 tablet of 24 shekels of silver being the debt of ilī-tappā; 1 mina of silver (that) i gave to ir'am-aššur for making purchases; 1 mina of silver (that) i gave to ah-šalim for making purchases. 9 -textiles and 1 abarnian one, (which) i gave to pilah-ištar for making purchases. 5 slaves and 5 slave-girls, of whom 1 slave-girl, named iyantalga, is for ilina, daughter of aššur-ṭāb. all this, lamassutum, the wife of elamma, left behind. ištar-pālil, ennam-suen and maṣi-ilī, lamassutum's representative(s), will entrust it to an affiliated trader and to her sons and they will bring it to the city and (there) my daughter, the -priestess, and my sons will act in accordance with the testamentary dispositions applying to them.
to adad-bāni ..., iliš-takil ... and pilah-ištar from the merchant: pilah-ištar and uzuwa bring you 1 talent 35 minas of silver, its import duty added, its transport tariff paid for. my dear brothers, buy tin of extra-fine quality according to the market price and ... pilah-ištar brings you x fine -gold belonging to us jointly. my dear brothers, dispatch my goods with the first leaving caravan. also, i further entrusted 40 minas of refined silver in the name of our father's house to pilah-ištar. witnessed by pūšu-kēn, by kuziziya, by adad-rē'ī.
from ennam-aššur to ali-ahum: here 2 men have reached an agreement with me concerning our father's investors, that i shall place half of the silver before him, and it will go twice to the city and they will satisfy themselves with their silver. concerning 3.5 minas of silver that our father took on uṣur-ša-ištar's account in the city - for that we are pardoned. the matter will fail, and within 5 days ... and i shall send the donkeys with ... then you too must be cleared there. convert bad copper to good. urgent! do not listen to others all the time. why is it that i keep hearing that you always listen to what strangers say? urgent! do not act rashly.
ilī-ašrannī son of sukkalliya has received 3 minas of refined silver from the proceeds of ušinalam's wool. witnessed by aššur-bāni son of kurbiya, by išme-ilum, by iddin-kūbum.
šalim-aššur made us approach amur-ištar and šalim-aššur said: "why have you taken the proceeds from 10 kutānu-textiles that i sold in the durhumit colony?" amur-ištar said: "yes, i have taken 4 talents of copper of poor quality." šalim-aššur said: "i hold nothing, yet you have taken it." amur-ištar said: "it is not you who have taken my merchandise?" šalim-aššur answered: "i have taken none of your merchandise." amur-ištar then said: "wait until the slave has come here." šalim-aššur said: "sure, let him come. then it will be me you can pressure on the basis of what your own slave says." "do wait!" šalim-aššur continued: "and for the silver that you have taken concerning iddin-abum i hold the certified tablet. that remains." the kanesh colony gave us for these proceedings and we gave our testimony before aššur's dagger. witnessed by uraya, by amurrum-bāni; buzutaya was our (absent) partner.
to ennam-aššur from ištar-rabiʾat: with respect to your silver that i owe you, my dear son, do not worry! i said: when will ṣill-adad be informed?" as for you - thinking of ṣill-adad - are not the servants i have to-day (also) your servants? when the road (opens) i shall clear my textiles and have your silver delivered directly to your person. here your representatives acted like this, so for as long as you wish your claim has been placed on the goods and the donkeys. as for the tablet concerning bēlum-bāni son of narām-sīn and two tablets concerning customers, which abī-anum left in your house, when the servants arrive they will transport the tablets.as for mine - do not worry about your silver."
the representatives of aššur-imittī son of ikūn-pī-ištar, aššur-imittī son of etaya, amur-aššur, aššur-ṭāb (and) ilī-ašrannī said to šalim-aššur: give us 1 talent of tin and 10 -textiles that belong to aššur-imittī. if the tin and the remain in your possession, you must pay at the rate 6:1 for the tin and 15 shekels per in silver." šalim-aššur answered: "and what if i have tin and from my goods remaining in his possession? will he pay me at the rate 6:1 for my tin and 15 shekels per in silver?" they have sealed a missive from the city concerning ikūn-pī-ištar, ilī-dan and akuwa (and) about my goods with the seals of šalim-aššur, aššur-imittī son of etaya and amur-aššur son of sukkalliya, and it has been entrusted to ... witnessed by atata, by aššur-malik, by ennānum. "
